GOOD
EVENING EVERYONE AND WELCOME TO
THE AUGUST EIGHT MEETING OF THE
ANN ARBOR CITY COUNCIL.
IF YOU ARE HERE FOR THE
HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION
MEETING YOU WILL BE SADLY
DISAPPOINTED.
>> THE HISTORIC DISTRICT
COMMUNITY MEETING IS DOWNSTAIRS
IN THE BASEMENT BEING HELD IN
THE ORDINARY COURSE.
>> IF YOU'RE ABLE PLEASE JOIN,
PLEASE STAND AND JOIN US FOR A
MOMENT OF SILENCE FOLLOWED BY
THE PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
BRIEFLY PRIOR TO HAVING OUR
MOMENT OF SILENCE ALL OBSERVE
THAT THE COMMUNITY LOST A
MEMBER A COMMUNITY MEMBER
OF LONG STANDING AND GOOD CHEER
IN IN IN D'TRE WHO RECENTLY
PASSED AWAY
BY THE UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA.
JUST ONE NATION FOR WHAT OUR
CLARK PLEASE CALL THE ROLE
OF COUNSEL COUNCIL MEMBER DISH
HERE FOR HEROISM HERE ELSMERE
SONG NOPSA COSPER WATSON HERE
OF OUR DENHA HERE CUSTOMER
GOSIA HERE RETAILOR HERE OR
ELSEWHERE IHR ABSENT HOUSEWARE
ACKMANN HERE ELSEWHERE BRIGS
HERE HOUSEWARE CORNELL ABSENTS
WE HAVE A QUORUM MEMBER MOTION
PLEASE TO APPROVE THE AGENDA BY
COUNCIL RECOMMENCING AND MY
COUNCIL MEMBER BRINGS
DISCUSSION OF THE AGENDA OR
THEATER POSED.
>> THE AGENDA IS APPROVED.
DO WE HAVE COMMUNICATIONS TODAY
FROM OUR CITY ADMINISTRATOR.
>> YES MAYOR IN THE YEAR WITH
ALL OF THE EMPHASIS AND FOCUS
ON THE ELECTIONS AND THE
ELECTION INTEGRITY AND
DEMOCRACY, I WANT TO SEE A FEW
MINUTES TO OUR CLERK TO GIVE A
RECAP OF HOW OUR MOST RECENT
ELECTION WAS CONDUCTED HIS
BUDGET THANK.
WE DID HAVE A SMOOTH AUGUST
PRIMARY.
THERE'S NO MAJOR INCIDENTS TO
REPORT.
I WILL SAY THAT APPROXIMATELY
TWENTY FOUR THOUSAND VOTES WERE
CAST IN THE AUGUST 6TH
ELECTION.
SEVENTEEN HUNDRED AND SIX
OF THOSE ABOUT SEVEN PERCENT
WERE CAST AT OUR NEW EARLY VOTE
SITES THAT WERE OPERATIONAL AT
THE THREE LIBRARY BRANCHES AS
WELL AS AT CITY HALL ABSENTEE
OR MAIL IN VOTES CONTINUE TO BE
THE MOST POPULAR OPTION FOR ANN
ARBOR VOTERS WITH NEARLY 15000
VOTES TABULATED AT OUR ABSENT
VOTER COUNT BOARD ALMOST 63
PERCENT OF TOTAL BALLOTS CAST
IN-PERSON ON ELECTION DAY
REPRESENTED ABOUT 7300 VOTES
AROUND 30 PERCENT.
WE ARE EXCITED TO PILOT AND
ELECTION DAY VOTE CENTER AT
CITY HALL THIS NEW VOTE CENTER
WAS THE FIRST IN THE STATE
OF MICHIGAN AND IT ALLOWS AN
OPPORTUNITY FOR VOTERS
REGISTERING TO VOTE ON ELECTION
DAY TO TABULATE THEIR OWN VOTE
ON SITE.
THIS IS A CHANGE FROM PREVIOUS
SAME DAY REGISTRATION LINES OUR
VOTERS HAD TO VOTE ABSENTEE
BALLOTS FOR LATER TABULATION.
WE EXPECT THIS NEW VOTE CENTER
TO BE IMPLEMENTED ON CAMPUS AT
THE UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN IN
NOVEMBER AND WILL HELP
STREAMLINE OPERATIONS THERE AS
WE HAVE MORE SAME DAY VOTER
REGISTRATION.
>> THANK YOU, MR. TONY.
>> THANK YOU.
WE NOW COME TO PUBLIC
COMMENTARY RESERVE TIME PUBLIC
COMMENTARY SERVE TIME AS AN
OPPORTUNITY FOR MEMBERS OF THE
PUBLIC TO SPEAK TO COUNCIL AND
THE COMMUNITY ABOUT MATTERS
OF MUNICIPAL INTEREST TO SPEAK
AT PUBLIC COMMENT RESERVE TIME
WHAT NEEDS TO HAVE SIGNED UP IN
ADVANCE BY CONTACTING OUR CITY
CLERK SPEAKERS WILL HAVE THREE
MINUTES IN WHICH TO SPEAK.
SO PLEASE PAY CLOSE ATTENTION
TO THE TIME OUR CLERK OR THE
TI CLOCK WILL NOTIFY YOU WHEN
30 SECONDS ARE REMAINING AND
WHEN YOUR TIME IS EXPIRED WHEN
YOUR TIME HAS EXPIRED PLEASE
CONCLUDE YOUR REMARKS AND CEDE
THE FLOOR.
OUR FIRST SPEAKER TODAY IS RITA
TURNER.
CHERINE
GOOD EVENING.
READY TO GO?
OK THANK YOU MAYOR TAYLOR AND
COUNCIL MEMBERS I'M HERE TO
TALK ABOUT THE LIGHTING
DECISION THAT I BELIEVE YOU
WILL BE MAKING THIS EVENING I
ASKED FOR THE COUNCIL TO
SUPPORT TO PLACE 29 WATT STREET
LAMPS IN THE RESIDENTIAL AREAS
AND RESERVE THE 58 WATTS FOR
THOSE AREAS THAT NEED HIGHER
WATTAGE.
YOU AS COUNCIL CAN SET A
STANDARD TO USE A TWO TIERED
LIGHTING STRATEGY WHICH DOES
NOT CREATE EXCESSIVE LIGHT
WHERE IT IS NOT NEEDED.
YOU CAN STORE AND MANAGE TWO
TYPES OF BULBS
THE 58 WATT AND
TWENTY NINE WATT AND SUSTAIN A
QUALITY OF LIGHTING IN
NEIGHBORHOODS THAT DOES NOT
DISTURB THE SLEEP OF MYSELF,
OTHER RESIDENTS AND IN
PARTICULAR THE CHILDREN.
OTHERWISE IF YOU CHOOSE ONLY A
FIFTY EIGHT WATT SINGLE PURPOSE
PURCHASE YOU WILL PAY MORE TO
DTT FOR THOSE WATTS.
YOU WILL THEN PAY MORE
ELECTRICITY LONG TERM FOR 75
PERCENT OF EXCESS LIGHTING IN
THE CITY OF ANN ARBOR.
NOT ONLY WILL YOU DO THAT, YOU
SET A STANDARD ANN ARBOR IS A
LEADER IN THIS FIELD AND IF YOU
SETTLE FOR FIFTY EIGHT WATT
ONLY YOU THEN CAN COUNT ON D.T.
AND OTHERS IN THIS ARENA TO USE
THAT AS A STANDARD AND CITE
THAT ANN ARBOR IS DOING THIS
THAT THEN ALLOWS PROLIFERATION
OF EXCESS LIGHTING ALL OVER
SOUTHEAST MICHIGAN AND PROBABLY
THE REST OF THE STATE.
SO YOU HAVE A CHOICE.
FIFTY WATT OR TWENTY NINE WHAT
OR BOTH AND I ASK YOU TO
CONSIDER DOING BOTH.
WE ARE CAPABLE WE ARE
COMPETENT.
>> WE CAN HANDLE THIS SO IF YOU
CHOOSE THE EASIER ROUTE EXPECT
THAT WE WILL HAVE A
PROLIFERATION OF EXCESS
LIGHTING IN OUR COMMUNITY AND
OTHER COMMUNITIES AROUND
SOUTHEAST MICHIGAN OR YOU CAN
CHOOSE THE TWO TIERED APPROACH
AND BE A LEADER IN THAT IN THAT
APPROACH.
AND I FINALLY WOULD SUGGEST
THAT WILL THE ONE WHAT APPROACH
REALLY BE IN KEEPING WITH SEMCO
GRANT TO REDUCE THE
CARBON FOOTPRINT IN THIS CITY
AND OUR REGION?
>> SO I THANK YOU FOR THAT TIME
AND I HOPE THAT YOU VOTE FOR A
TWO TIERED APPROACH TO THE
LIGHTING IN OUR CITY.
THANK YOU.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS ERIC
ADVANTAGE
.
MAYOR COLLER WILL BE UNTIL OUR
GOOD EVENING.
MY NAME IS ERIC BONEFISH AND
I'M CALLING IN FROM THE THIRD
WARD.
I'M HERE TO EXPRESS MY STRONG
SUPPORT FOR DC TO THE
RESOLUTION DIRECTING OUR CITY
ADMINISTRATOR TO NEGOTIATE A
TRANSFER IN ITS TRUNK LINES TO
OUR OWN CONTROL.
THE PEOPLE THAT HARBOR HAVE
LONG EXPRESSED HOW MUCH OF A
PRIORITY IS TO HAVE A
TRANSPORTATION NETWORK THAT IS
SAFE FOR ALL USERS AFTER ALL,
WE AND THOSE WE CARE ABOUT USE
OUR ROADS DAILY TRANSPORTATION
SAFETY ALSO INTERSECTS WITH OUR
COMMUNITIES VALUE OF EQUITY IN
THAT THOSE THAT OFTEN THOSE
WITH LESSER MEANS ARE USING
LESS SAFE MODES
OF TRANSPORTATION ALONG OUR
TRUNK LINES WHEN WE START WE
NEED ALL MODES
OF TRANSPORTATION TO BE SAFE AT
ALL TIMES OF DAY THROUGHOUT OUR
CITY CURRENTLY HAS CONTROL OVER
ITS TRUNK LINES WITHIN OUR CITY
AND ITS SADLY CLEAR THAT NOT
DOES NOT SHARE OUR PRIORITY FOR
SAFETY.
GETTING THEM ON BOARD WITH
MEANINGFUL ALTERATIONS HAS BEEN
THE REGULAR AND OFTEN
UNSUCCESSFUL STRUGGLE.
THEREFORE WE ARE LEFT WITH NO
OTHER OPTION BUT TO TAKE
CONTROL OF THOSE TRUNK LINES SO
WE CAN REENGINEER THEM TO MAKE
THEM SAFER.
I'D LIKE TO THANK COUNCIL
MEMBERS AKMAN BRIGG'S, CORNELL
GHAZI EDWYN AND HARRISON FOR
BRINGING THIS RESOLUTION
FORWARD AND I HOPE IT WILL
RECEIVE UNANIMOUS SUPPORT.
BUT THERE ARE OTHER REASONS OUR
ROADS ARE NOT AS SAFE AS THEY
CAN BE AND SHOULD BE TO MANY
OF US IT'S NOT CLEAR THAT WE
HAVE SUFFICIENT COMMITMENT TO
TRANSPORTATION SAFETY FOR EACH
RELEVANT LEVEL WITHIN OUR CITY
GOVERNMENT.
ANN ARBOR HAS A VISION ZERO
GOAL TO ELIMINATE FATALITIES
AND SERIOUS INJURIES RESULTING
FROM TRAFFIC CRASHES BY 2025.
IT'S OBVIOUS THAT WE'RE NOT
GOING TO MEET THAT GOAL AND
THAT HAS REAL AND TRAGIC
CONSEQUENCES.
THE CHAIN OF ACCOUNTABILITY IS
CLEAR COUNCIL IS ACCOUNTABLE TO
THE VOTERS.
THE CITY ADMINISTRATOR MR. DE
HONI IS ACCOUNTABLE TO COUNCIL
AND TRANSPORTATION FACING
DEPARTMENTS ARE ACCOUNTABLE TO
MR. DARBY.
SO WE NEED TO QUICKLY FIGURE
WHY WE'RE FAILING AT THIS AND
IMPLEMENT MEASUREMENTS AND
STANDARDS WITHIN GOVERNMENT TO
ACHIEVE THOSE GOALS AND PROVIDE
STAFF WITH THE NECESSARY MEANS
AND BACKING AS EARLY AS
CONCEIVABLE.
I APPRECIATE YOUR TIME.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS ADAM
GOODMAN
.
ADAM GOODMAN IS ALSO JOINING US
ON THE GO AHEAD CALLER.
>> HI, THIS IS ADAM GOODMAN
SPEAKING TO YOU FROM THE FIFTH
WARD AND I'M ALSO SPEAKING
TONIGHT TO URGE YOU TO VOTE YES
ON THE TRUNK LINE TRANSFER
RESOLUTION.
SO A LITTLE OVER 18 MONTHS AGO,
DAVID HAROLD DARBIE JR. WAS HIT
ONE CRITICALLY INJURED
ATTEMPTING TO CROSS JACKSON
AVENUE BURWOOD ON FOOT.
THIS HAPPENS TO BE ONE OF FOUR
LOCATIONS ALONG JACKSON, WEST
HURON WHERE NEIGHBORHOOD
RESIDENTS AND THE CITY
GOVERNMENT HAVE BEEN SEEKING TO
INSTALL CROSSWALKS FOR DECADES
.
THESE ARE BADLY NEEDED BECAUSE
THAT STRETCH OF JACKSON DOES
NOT HAVE A SINGLE SEAT CROSSING
FOR A STRETCH OF OVER TWO
THIRDS OF A MILE.
>> BUT BECAUSE JACKSON IS THE
TRUNK LINE WE HAVE THUS FAR
BEEN UNABLE TO SEE THIS DONE IN
RESPONSE TO THAT JANUARY TWENTY
TWENTY THREE CRASH.
I ACTUALLY WROTE AN OPEN LETTER
ADDRESSED TO OUR REGION
LEADERSHIP AND TO YOU ALL
CALLING FOR AN IMMEDIATE
SOLUTION.
I ASKED NEIGHBORS AND OTHER
COMMUNITY MEMBERS TO SIGN AND
SAID IT AND MANY, MANY OF US
ARE FED UP WITH THE SITUATION
AND I DID HEAR BACK FROM BOTH
END UP IN THE CITY THAT SOME
SORT OF AGREEMENT HAS BEEN
REACHED AND PLANS ARE IN
PROGRESS.
BUT NOW 18 MONTHS HAVE PASSED
AND NOTHING HAS ACTUALLY
HAPPENED.
THIS IS UNACCEPTABLE AND IT'S
CLEARLY DOWN TO SOME DISTANCE
FROM WHAT LITTLE I'VE BEEN ABLE
TO GLEAN.
IT SOUNDS AS THOUGH I'M OUT IS
ACTUALLY INVENTING NEW NEVER
BEFORE SEEN NEVER BEFORE SEEN
FORMS OF BUREAUCRATIC RED TAPE
AS IF DESPITE US AND ACCORDING
TO INFORMATION SHARED AT THE
LAST COUNCIL MEETING DEALING
WITH THIS HAS APPARENTLY TAKEN
SO MUCH OF OUR TRANSPORTATION
STAFF'S TIME THAT IT'S DELAYED
OTHER IMPORTANT ROAD SAFETY
PROJECTS AROUND THE CITY UNTIL
NEXT YEAR.
NOW I BRING UP THE SPECIFIC
SITUATION ON JACKSON UP BECAUSE
I THINK THIS CONFERENCE REPORT
WHICH COULD TAKE YEARS WILL BE
THE MOST EXPEDIENT WAY TO GET A
CROSSWALKS INSTALLED.
BUT I THINK THE SITUATION IS
EMBLEMATIC OF A MUCH LARGER AND
MORE SERIOUS PROBLEM WE HAVE
WITH THE AMTRAK LINES IN OUR
CITY INSTALLING A FEW
CROSSWALKS LITERALLY THE LEAST
THAT WE AND THEY COULD DO TO
IMPROVE SAFETY HERE.
THAT'S THE ABSOLUTE MINIMUM AND
YET WE FACE DECADES
OF OBSTRUCTION AND DELAY.
SO IF WE WANT TO ACHIEVE OUR
CITY'S TRANSPORTATION AND
CLIMATE ACTION GOALS, THE
CHANGES WE WANT WE HAVE TO MAKE
ON THESE CORRIDORS ARE MUCH,
MUCH MORE SUBSTANTIAL AND
AMBITIOUS THAN THAT.
AND IT'S CLEAR THAT THOSE
CHANGES WILL NEVER HAPPEN IF
MTA REMAINS IN CONTROL.
SO I AGAIN URGE YOU TO VOTE YES
ON THIS RESOLUTION TONIGHT.
AND FINALLY, I JUST WANT TO
MENTION I ACTUALLY HAVE ONE
OF THESE SUPERPIPE 65 DC STREET
LIGHTS RIGHT OUTSIDE MY BEDROOM
WINDOW AND I DON'T LOVE THAT
BUT IT'S ALSO NOT TURNED MY
STREET CORNER INTO THE
APOCALYPTICAL SCAPE THAT SOME
FOLKS SEEM TO BE DESCRIBING.
IT JUST SEEMS TO ME THAT SOME
OF THE RHETORIC HERE HAS BEEN A
BIT OVERSTATED.
SO I DON'T CLAIM TO KNOW WHAT
THE RIGHT ANSWER IS BUT I HOPE
WE CAN ARRIVE AT A REASONABLE
SOLUTION AND NOT MAKE THE
PERFECT THE ENEMY OF THE GOOD.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS JAMES
CHERINE.
>> GOOD EVENING, MR. MAYOR.
AND MEMBERS OF COUNCIL AT YOUR
JULY 15TH MEETING NOTE WAS MADE
OF THE EMISSION
OF CONSIDERATION OF THE 2009
WATT FIXTURES FOR THE STREET
LIGHTING PROPOSAL AND ACCORDING
TO THE STAFF MEMORANDUM THAT
YOU RECEIVED IN YOUR PACKET
DATED THIS WEEK I'M QUOTING
HERE DID NOT ADEQUATE LEAVE
THESE FIXTURE ALTERNATIVES.
SO TO SUMMARIZE THEY JUST
DIDN'T DO IT AND THE
EXPLANATION AND THAT THEY ONLY
HAD SINCE DECEMBER OF TWENTY
TWENTY THREE DOESN'T SEEM A
SUFFICIENT REASON NOT TO
RESPOND TO THE REQUEST FOR
CONSIDERATION OF THE 2009 WATTS
TO SUMMARIZE THE TWENTY NINE
WHAT ALTERNATIVE DOES MEET AND
STANDARD FOR THE NEIGHBORHOOD
LIGHTING IT SAVES ENERGY AND
MONEY AND THE ANALYSIS FOR THIS
WAS PROVIDED A CITY STAFF MORE
THAN ONCE WE AND YOU AS OUR
REPRESENTATIVES DESERVE THIS
ANALYSIS SO THAT WE HAVE ALL
OF THE INFORMATION TO MAKE AN
INFORMED DECISION WHICH ARE
GOING TO HAVE VERY GREAT IMPACT
FOR A VERY LONG TIME.
AND SO THAT IS THE MAIN THRUST
OF MY REMARKS ABOUT THE
MEMORANDUM BEFORE YOU TONIGHT.
I WILL SAY IN ADDITION THAT THE
MOVE TO A WARMER SOFT WHITE
TWENTY SEVEN HUNDRED KELVIN IS
BOTH COMMENDABLE AND
APPRECIATED.
THANK YOU.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS RITA
MITCHELL
.
MAYOR RITA MITCHELL IS JOINING
THE LITTLE ONE NINE FOUR NEW
YORK FROM THE START OF I THANK
YOU THIS RUDIMENTAL CALLING
FROM TWENTY ONE FIFTH STREET
REGARDING THE DEMOLITION
OF CITY PROPERTY WHICH IS THE
ECONOMIC AGENDA I WANT TO THANK
COUNCIL FOR IDENTIFYING AND
FUNDING THE PROTECTION AND
REPAIR OF THE CHIMNEY AT 415
WASHINGTON STREET FOR THE
PURPOSE OF RETAINING RETAINING
IT FOR NEAR
ENDANGERED BIRDS.
THE CHIMNEYS WAS THAT USE IT
FOR ROOSTING PURPOSES.
IT'S AN IMPORTANT PART OF THEIR
MIGRATION PATTERN OUR URBAN
LANDSCAPE LANDSCAPE PROVIDES
FEWER AND FEWER FEWER
OPPORTUNITIES TO SUPPORT
WILDLIFE AND THIS IS A WELCOME
ACTION.
THANK YOU.
WITH RESPECT TO THE SAFETY 415
WEST WASHINGTON I WANT TO
REINFORCE THE POINT THAT THE
LOCATION IS ENTIRELY IN THE OLD
CREEK FLOODPLAIN AS INDICATED
IN THE PHASE ONE ENVIRONMENTAL
ASSESSMENT THAT WAS INCLUDED IN
THE RESOLUTION FOR TONIGHT'S
ACTION COUNCIL RECEIVED
INFORMATION FROM OUR RECENTLY
RETIRED FLOODPLAIN MANAGER
JERRY HANCOCK WHO INDICATED
THAT THE SITE SHOULD NOT BE
USED FOR HUMAN HABITATION.
THE INCREASED RISK OF FLOODING
RELATED TO THE CLIMATE CRISIS
MEANS THAT WE CAN EXPECT MORE
FLOOD EVENTS.
THE CITY SHOULD AVOID
RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS IN THE
FIRST THING FOR THE SAFETY
OF RESIDENTS AND FOR EMERGENCY
PERSONNEL WHO WOULD BE CALLED
INTO ACTION IN A RISKY LOCATION
IN THE CENTER FLOODING SHIFTING
TO DC ONE THE ST. CHARLES
RESOLUTION ARTS COUNCIL TO
AGENDA FOR ACTION ON THE
RESOLUTION AND TWO DIFFERENT
LIGHT BULBS WE'RE EXPERIENCING
THE CLIMATE CRISIS WE SHOULD BE
WORKING TO IMPLEMENT THE BEST
ACTION FOR REDUCING GREENHOUSE
GAS EMISSIONS ASSOCIATED WITH
ELECTRICITY FOR THE LONG RUN
AND INSTALL THE LEVEES THAT USE
THE LEAST ELECTRICITY WHERE
THEY APPROPRIATELY SUPPORT
SAFETY AND HEALTH FOR PEOPLE,
WILDLIFE AND PLANTS.
I APPRECIATE THE EFFORT TO
INCLUDE SHIELDING BUT WITH THE
LIGHTING WITH INSULATION MY
UNDERSTANDING IS THE SHIELDING
WILL NOT REDUCE BRIGHTNESS BUT
IT WILL REDUCE REDIRECT WHICH
CAN STILL DISPERSE AND ADD TO
THE PROBLEM WE HAVE
RECOMMENDATIONS TO USE TWENTY
NINE LIGHT BULBS IN THE
RESIDENTIAL AREAS WHERE
EXCESSIVE BRIGHTNESS IS LIKELY
TO CLOG MOST RESIDENTIAL
COMPLAINTS IF POSSIBLE TO HEAD
OFF SUCH COMPLAINTS BY
INSTALLING BETWEEN NINE OPTION
AND RESIDENTIAL AREAS IN THE
FIRST HALF OF ELIZEU LIGHT BULB
UPDATE.
LET'S DO IT RIGHT THE FIRST
TIME WE DON'T HAVE MUCH TIME ON
THE CLIMATE CRISIS CLOCK.
I ASKED COUNSEL TO LOOK INTO
THE COST SAVINGS OF INSTALLING
THE TWENTY NINE WHAT LED LIGHT
BULBS AND APPLIED THAT AMOUNT
TO ANY NECESSARY STAFFING
REQUIREMENTS TO SUPPORT THE
MANAGEMENT OF TWO TYPES
OF LIGHT BULBS.
THE LIKELY AMOUNT OF COST WOULD
BE A FRACTION OF THE AMOUNT
OF EIGHT MILLION DOLLARS THAT'S
PROPOSED FOR THE CONSENT
PORTION OF TONIGHT'S AGENDA.
>> SO HELP YOUR FRIEND THIRTY
SECONDS AND YOU.
THANK YOU.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS ROBERT
STENCEL
IS YOUR STEM CELL PHONE
NUMBER EIGHT THREE FOUR STAR
SIX FROM YOUR PHONE.
GO AHEAD
.
CALLER THREE I HAD CAN YOU HEAR
ME NOW?
YES, WE OK?
THANK YOU MR. MAYOR.
I DO WANT TO SPEAK IN FAVOR
OF THE LOWER WATTAGE SOLUTION
FOR THE STREET CONSIDERATION
AND YOU SECOND A LOT OF WHAT'S
BEEN SAID ABOUT IT ALREADY I'M
SOMEWHAT MYSTIFIED WHY BIG
CORPORATION BIG HAVE MANAGED TO
STOP TWO DIFFERENT KINDS
OF LIGHT BULBS FOR THE STREET
LIGHTS.
BUT I DO PREDICT THAT LOWER
WATTAGE BULBS WILL PROBABLY
BECOME STANDARD AROUND
SOUTHEAST MICHIGAN OVER TIME.
SO IT WOULD BE A WORTHWHILE
INVESTMENT ON THEIR PART.
YOU PLAY BALL HERE IF FOR SOME
REASON WE DO HAVE TO PROCEED
WITH THIS AT THE AIRPORT
SOLUTION THEN LET'S ADVISE BP
TO STOCK UP ON A LOT
OF ADDITIONAL STREET HOUSE SIDE
SHIELDS EXCUSE ME OUTSIDE
SHIELDS WHICH IS A FANCY WORD
FOR A LAMPSHADE BECAUSE THEIR
BOB AND I TOO LIKE A CAR
SPEAKER HAVE ONE OF THESE 65
EXCESSIVELY BRIGHT EXCESSIVELY
HOT LAMPS WHICH IS QUITE A
BOTHER.
SO I THINK WE CAN SHORT CIRCUIT
COMPLAINTS BY GOING WITH A
LOWER LOWER WATTAGE TO BEGIN A
SO THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
THANK YOU.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS RALPH NARKY
.
GOOD EVENING COUNCIL RALPH
MCCUE FROM THE FIFTH WARD AND
DC ONE.
I SENT YOU A DETAILED EMAIL
TODAY IN SUMMARY FIRST I
COMMEND STAFF FOR MANAGING TO
GET THE GRANT MONEY TO DO THIS
.
YOU CAN'T GO ANYWHERE WITHOUT
THAT AND I COMMEND STAFF FOR
THAT.
BUT I BET STAFF'S ASSERTION
THAT USING TWO KINDS OF BULBS
WOULD REQUIRE FULL TIME
EMPLOYEES IMPLAUSIBLE AT BEST
AND STAFF'S FAILURE TO EVEN
CONSIDER POTENTIAL OFFSETTING
COST SAVINGS DUE TO LOWER POWER
USAGE SHOULD STOP A YES VOTE
TONIGHT THE FIRST YEAR
IMPLEMENTING THE PROGRAM MIGHT
REQUIRE AN INTERN OR A CONTRACT
EMPLOYEE.
BUT SINCE THE BULBS ARE
SUPPOSED TO LAST AT LEAST FIVE
YEARS YEARS TWO TO FIVE SHOULD
HAVE ZERO STAFF COST ZERO AFTER
THAT EVEN ASSUMING THAT ALL THE
BULBS FAIL AND FOLLOWING FIVE
YEARS THEY'D ONLY HAVE TO BE
REPLACED A FEW PER DAY THAT
COULD BE MANAGED BY HAVING ADT
CONTRACTORS TAKE THE CITY
MONTHLY AND OPENING THE STORAGE
SPACE FOR PICK UP MONTHLY AT
MOST A FEW HOURS A MONTH AND
ORDERING MORE BULBS NOT A FULL
TIME EMPLOYEE, NOT EVEN CLOSE.
I SENT YOU ROUGH CALCULATIONS
OF POTENTIAL LOWER POWER USAGE
COST SAVINGS.
I THINK IT MIGHT BE MORE THAN
50000 A YEAR WHICH WOULD BE A
BIG FINANCIAL BENEFIT LONG TERM
PLEASE STAFF TO RESPOND.
I COULD BE WAY OFF BUT MAKING A
DECISION WITHOUT KNOWING THAT
NUMBER IS BEYOND FOOLISH ON K
SEVEN THIS IS YET ANOTHER
EXAMPLE OF A BIG FLAW IN
IMPLEMENTATION OF OUR BEST
FAILURE POLICY TO BIDDERS AND
AT ONE POINT FOUR MILLION
CONTRACT SCORED A TENTH OF A
POINT APART PHOTO FINISH EIGHTY
POINT EIGHT EIGHTY POINT SEVEN
ETM THE LOSER OUTSCORED THE
WINNER TWENTY TWENTY FIRST
CENTURY BY THREE POINTS ON
SAFETY FIFTEEN PERCENT
SUSTAINABILITY TWO POINTS
TWENTY PERCENT AND ON PRICE BY
ONE POINT NINE POINTS HERE THAT
REPRESENTS ONE HUNDRED THOUSAND
DOLLARS.
HOW THIS HAPPENED TWENTY FIRST
CENTURY AS A CONTRACTOR
SUBSCRIBERS AT NO HAS TO ITSELF
TO A UNION APPRENTICESHIP
PROGRAM THAT'S WORTH A WHOPPING
SEVEN POINTS ENOUGH TO WIPE OUT
ERTMS LEAD IN ALL OTHER
CATEGORIES INCLUDING PRICE AND
SAFETY.
SO WE GET TO PAY THE EXTRA
HUNDRED GRAND WE'VE OFTEN BEEN
TOLD THAT THE APPRENTICESHIP
PROGRAM WOULD RESULT IN BETTER
SAFETY.
NOT TRUE HERE.
ETM SCORED BETTER A PERFECT
TWENTY DOES PROVIDE OTHER
BENEFITS MAYBE MAYBE NOT THE
WORKERS AND CONSTRUCTION DEMO
CONTRACTS GET PAID GENERALLY
THE SAME BASED ON THE CATEGORY
OF WORKER ETM SCORED HIGHER ON
SUSTAINABILITY TOO BUT WE STILL
HAVE TO PAY ONE HUNDRED GRAND
MORE TO THE OTHER CONTRACTOR.
I'M OK WITH TILTING THE TABLES
A BIT BUT THIS IS WAY PAST THAT
WE NEED TO TAKE A LONG LOOK AT
THIS POLICY.
IT'S WASTING BIG MONEY.
DOES IT RISE ILLEGAL
DISCRIMINATION AGAINST NONUNION
CONTRACTORS?
I DON'T KNOW BUT I HOPE YOUR
ATTORNEYS ARE LOOKING AT THAT.
I'M NOT ANTI-UNION.
I AS A UNION MEMBER FOR EIGHT
YEARS I CO-LEAD AN ORGANIZING
DRIVE NEGOTIATING COMMITTEE AND
AN ALL OR NOTHING STRIKE THAT
WE WON BUT BEST VALUE SHOULD BE
FOR THE WHOLE CITY, NOT FOR THE
JUST FOR THE CONSTRUCTION
UNIONS.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS KATHY
GRISWOLD.
GOOD EVENING.
AT RECENT MEETINGS I HAVE
DISCUSSED THE POSSIBILITY OF AN
HEADLY OVERRIDE RESULTING IN AT
LEAST A TWO MILE TAX INCREASE
IN ANN ARBOR.
I OPPOSE ANY TAX INCREASE AND
WILL SUPPORT MY THEORY OF A TAX
INCREASE WITH THE FOLLOWING ONE
AND ADMINISTRATION COMMITTEE
MEETING A FEW MONTHS AGO THE
ADMINISTRATOR WARNED COUNCIL
THAT THEY COULD NOT HAVE A DOLL
AND NEEDED TO PRIORITIZE THEIR
SPENDING REQUESTS.
I HAVE SEEN NO EVIDENCE
OF FISCAL RESPONSIBILITY.
THE PROPOSAL TO TAKE OVER THE
AMT AT ROADWAY'S WILL ADD A
SECOND TAX BURDEN AT A TIME
WHEN MTA IS FOCUSING PEDESTRIAN
SAFETY AND THE MTA PEDESTRIAN
CRASH DATA FOR ALL OF MICHIGAN
IS BETTER THAN THE ANN ARBOR
PEDESTRIAN CRASH DATA.
THIS MEANS THAT THE EXCUSE ME
THE CITY HAS NOT RELEASED THEIR
DATA BUT A PRIVATE CITIZEN
REPORTS THAT TWENTY TWENTY
THREE WAS THE MOST DANGEROUS
FOR ANN ARBOR PEDESTRIANS SINCE
2014 AND THIS IS CONSISTENT
WITH THE MICHIGAN STATE POLICE
DATA WHICH CAN BE FOUND AT
MICHIGAN TRAFFIC CRASH FACTS
GIVEN THAT WE SPENT MILLIONS
OF DOLLARS ON PEDESTRIAN SAFETY
AND SAW NO SIGNIFICANT
IMPROVEMENT AND NO SIGNIFICANT
IMPROVEMENT OVER THE STATE, WE
MUST TAKE A CLOSER LOOK AT OUR
METHODOLOGY.
NUMBER TWO THE DTG STREET LIGHT
REPLACEMENT WHILE THIS IS NOT
CITY FUNDS, THE NEGOTIATED DEAL
IS NOT WHAT THE PUBLIC WANTS.
WE LISTEN MORE TO IT THAN WE DO
TO OUR CITIZENS.
IT IS NOT CONSISTENT WITH OUR
DARK SKIES ORDINANCE AND WILL
RESULT IN FUTURE ADDITIONAL
EXPENSES EXPENSES WHICH WILL
LEAD TO NEW TAXES WHEN WE
REPLACE THE FIFTY BULBS IN THE
NEIGHBORHOOD.
NUMBER THREE AN INTERNAL MEMO
FROM THE COUNTY ADMINISTRATOR
DISCUSSES THE POSSIBILITY
OF THE HEADLY OVERRIDE TO
INCREASE REVENUE IN THE COUNTY
EVEN THOUGH OUR COUNTY SPENDING
HAS FAR EXCEEDED THE RATE
OF INFLATION IN RECENT YEARS.
IN ADDITION, I AM VERY SAD TO
KNOW A PEDESTRIAN WHO IS
NEEDLESSLY INJURED ON OUR
UNSAFE ROADWAYS BECAUSE WE WILL
NOT ADDRESS KNOWN PROBLEMS.
WE KNOW WHAT A PROBLEMS ARE.
WE DON'T REPORT OUR DATA AND WE
DON'T CORRECT OUR ROADWAYS.
WE HAVE INAPPROPRIATE LIGHTING
,INCONSISTENT CROSSWALK
SIGNAGE AND POORLY DESIGNED
INTERSECTIONS WHICH ARE NOT
CORRECTED.
SORRY I'M GETTING A BIT CHOKED
UP BUT YOU KNOW WHEN YOU HAVE A
PERSONAL FRIEND WHO IS
CRITICALLY INJURED AT AN
INTERSECTION THAT YOU
COMPLAINED ABOUT FOR 20 YEARS
,
IT HURTS.
THANK YOU.
>> OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS MATTHEW
DREISBACH.
>> HEY, WHAT'S UP?
MY NAME IS MATT.
I LIVE NEXT DOOR.
I CAN ACTUALLY SEE THIS
BUILDING FROM MY WINDOW.
I'VE LIVED HERE TEN YEARS.
I WENT TO MICHIGAN FOR
UNDERGRAD AND GRAD SCHOOL AND
NOW I'M A SOFTWARE ENGINEER AT
TOYOTA.
SO I WAS TRYING TO GET INVOLVED
IN CIVICS AND I SHOWED TO MY
FIRST COUNCIL MEETING LIKE A
MONTH AGO AND IT WAS GREAT.
THERE'S IMPORTANT THINGS THAT
WERE HAPPENING BUT MY CRITICISM
WAS THAT IT WAS A LITTLE BIT
BORING.
ALL RIGHT.
SO ANYWAYS I SET OUT TO TRY TO
FIX THAT AND THAT'S WHAT I'M
HERE TO TALK ABOUT TODAY, WHICH
IS SO I BUILT A WEBSITE THAT
LETS YOU SUBSCRIBE TO AN EMAIL
THAT'S A SUMMARY OF WHAT GOES
ON IN THIS CITY COUNCIL.
SO THE URL IS CITY HALL DOT
EMAIL.
IT'S NOT CITY HALL DOT COM.
THERE'S LIKE REALLY EXPENSIVE
CITY HALL.
THAT EMAIL IS IF YOU SUBSCRIBE
NOW FOR EXAMPLE ON FRIDAY
MORNING YOU'LL GET LIKE AN
EMAIL BLAST.
IT'S JUST LIKE A COUPLE
OF PARAGRAPHS ABOUT WHAT
HAPPENED.
IT'S PRETTY GOOD.
IT RUNS ON IT DOESN'T MATTER.
IT'S NOT NOT A COMPANY IS NOT A
COMPANY.
IT'S JUST SOMETHING I BUILT AND
I WAS KIND OF EXCITED ABOUT IT.
I FIGURED YOU GUYS ALSO BE KIND
OF EXCITED ABOUT IT.
LET'S SEE.
OK, HOW DOES IT WORK?
SO IT ACTUALLY TAKES THE
YOUTUBE AUTO GENERATED
TRANSCRIPT WHICH IS LIKE REALLY
GOOD NOW AND THEN IT SHOVES
THAT INTO META RELEASED A NEW
A.I. MODEL THAT'S REAL GOOD AT
IT AND THEN IT USES THAT AND
IT'S IT'S COOL.
>> WE'VE ALSO OK WHO WOULD
BENEFIT?
>> SO MAYBE YOU HAVE LIKE A
SIGNIFICANT OTHER WHO DOESN'T
REALLY WANT TO COME TO THESE
MEETINGS.
RIGHT.
BUT MAYBE THEY WOULD LIKE IT IN
A SUMMARY AND YOU MIGHT ENJOY
OR MAYBE YOU'RE LISTENING ON
THE ZOOM AND YOU'D RATHER NOT
WE LAUNCHED LET'S SEE OH THIS
NOT REPLACE THE FOUR MINUTES.
I MEAN IT'S A REALLY VALUABLE
THIS IS JUST LIKE A COUPLE
OF PARAGRAPHS SO NOT A
REPLACEMENT FOR MINUTES.
THOSE ARE SUPER COOL.
WE LAUNCHED MONDAY.
WE HAVE FOUR SUBSCRIBERS AND
TWO OF THEM ARE MY PARENTS.
ALL RIGHT.
SO WE'RE TRYING TO GET A LITTLE
BIT BETTER THAT AGAIN THE URL
IS CITY HALL DOT EMAIL LOVE
WHAT YOU GUYS ARE DOING.
>> THIS IS KIND OF FUN.
THANK YOU.
YEAH.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS EVAN
SALINITIES LEFT MEETING.
I INTRODUCED CASTLE AND THE
CITY ADMINISTRATOR TO MY
ELDERLY MOTHER OLUSOLA LEOTIS,
THE VISIBLE TARGET OF ABUSE BY
CITY OFFICIALS.
I RAISE THE ISSUE OF AN
INVESTIGATION WHAT IF SEVERAL
ISSUES MADE MY FAMILY THE
TARGET OF SUCH ECONOMIC ASSAULT
HARASSING IN OUR HOME?
I START WITH THREE PARALLEL
SUSPECTS ARE WE TARGETS BECAUSE
MY FAMILY FILED A LAWSUIT
AGAINST A DARLING CHEMICAL
INDUSTRY CONSTRUCTION PRODUCT
CALLED SPRAY POLYURETHANE FOAM
INSULATION.
THIS CONSTRUCTION PRODUCT
ESSENTIALLY MANUFACTURED IN
YOUR HOME BY COMBINING TWO
CHEMICALS IS POORLY REGULATED
AND WITHIN MANY RESIDENTIAL
SETTINGS IT'S DIFFICULT AND
EXPENSIVE TO MANUFACTURE TO A
SIGNIFICANT DEGREE OF QUALITY
ASSURANCE.
IS IT BECAUSE WE WON A LAWSUIT
AGAINST OUR WELL-CONNECTED
LOCAL ATTORNEY WHO REPRESENTED
US IN THAT CONSTRUCTION CASE
AND SECRETLY BOUND US TO A
CONTRACT MAKING US ASSUME THE
RISKS OF THE CHEMICAL COMPANIES
FAILED PRODUCT IT COSTS ROUGHLY
ROUGHLY FORTY THOUSAND DOLLARS
TO DEFEAT THE CHEMICAL
COMPANY'S ATTEMPT TO BIND US TO
THIS ILLEGAL CONTRACT.
MICHIGAN'S JUDICIAL SYSTEM IS
DOMINATED BY THE BAR
ASSOCIATION, A TIGHT KNIT
GROUPING OF JUDGES AND
ATTORNEYS ALIKE.
IT TRAGICALLY ALLOWS FOR
RESIDENTS TO BE FORCED INTO
CONTRACT TERMS THEY NEVER
AGREED TO LARGELY THE BENEFIT
OF DEEP POCKETED CORPORATE
CORPORATES.
IT COSTS TOO MUCH MONEY AND
DEMANDS DETAILED EVIDENCE TO
REVERSE SUCH FORCE CONTRACTS.
WE KEPT GOOD RECORDS FOR THE
JURY TO SEE BUT MANY CLIENTS
DON'T KNOW WHAT TO DO THIS AND
THEY'RE FED TO THE WOLVES
FINALLY, IS IT BECAUSE I FILED
AN ANTITRUST COMPLAINT TO THE
FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION
LABELING THE MICHIGAN BAR
ASSOCIATION A CARTEL WITH
UNFAIR INFLUENCE OVER
MICHIGAN'S JUDICIAL SYSTEM.
THIS CARTEL OF LAWYERS AND
JUDGES HAS
CREATED ANTI-DEMOCRATIC
BARRIERS PREVENTING THE AVERAGE
MICHIGANDER FROM ACCESSING OUR
COURTS TO DEFEND OUR RIGHTS BY
ARTIFICIALLY RAISING LEGAL
COSTS AND BY OTHER MEANS.
AND ARBOR'S COMMUNITY STANDARDS
DIVISION HAS WEAPONIZE THIS
FACT AND NOW TARGETS RESIDENTS
LIKE MY ELDERLY MOTHER WITH
COMPLETE IMPUNITY.
HENCE MY TWENTY TWENTY TWO
ACTIVITIES URGING THE CREATION
OF AN OMBUDSPERSON TO MY
KNOWLEDGE, THE CITY
ADMINISTRATOR WHO WAS
COMMISSIONED BY UNANIMOUS
COUNCIL VOTE TO PRODUCE AN
OMBUDSPERSONS REPORT HAS MISSED
THE REPORT DEADLINE BY A FULL
YEAR AND COUNTING I BASE MY
ANTITRUST COMPLAINT MY FAMILY'S
EXPERIENCE WITH VARIOUS MEMBERS
OF THE MICHIGAN BAR BE THEY
RULE BREAKING PUBLIC SECTOR
ATTORNEYS RULE BREAKING LOCAL
JUDGES OR PRIVATE ATTORNEYS WHO
MAYHAPS RALLIED TO ASSIST OUR
ROGUE ATTORNEY ONCE THIS PERSON
WAS IN DEEP TROUBLE.
COUNCIL IS INFORMED THAT
SERIOUS RULES HAVE BEEN BROKEN
AND IS ACCOUNTABLE.
SO WHAT WILL YOU DO?
WILL YOU INVESTIGATE SHADY
PRACTICES WITHIN COMMUNITY
STANDARDS AND PROTECT RESIDENTS
FROM TARGETED ECONOMIC ASSAULTS
OR WILL YOU SUPPORT ROGUE LOCAL
OFFICIALS MOTIVATED BY HOSTILE
CORPORATE INTERESTS TO ATTACK
WHISTLEBLOWERS?
>> EVAN FROM WARD FIVE THANK
ARE THEIR COMMUNICATIONS TODAY
FROM COUNCIL AND COUNCILMAN
DENHA.
>> YEAH, I JUST WANTED TO
BRIEFLY THANK THE CLERK AND
CLARK STAFF AND ALL OF THE
VOLUNTEERS THROUGHOUT THE CITY
FOR RUNNING ANOTHER GREAT
ELECTION HERE IN THE COMMUNITY
AND THANKS FOR THAT REPORT.
I REALLY APPRECIATE IT.
COUNCIL MEMBER WATSON AS AS
PART OF MY CONTINUING
COMMITMENT TO CONSTITUENT
ENGAGEMENT I'LL BE HOSTING A
COFFEE HOUR ON SUNDAY, AUGUST
18TH AT SWEETWATER ON PLYMOUTH
AND GREEN FROM THREE TO FOUR
THIRTY P.M. LOOKING FORWARD TO
SEEING YOU THERE.
AN UPDATE FOR RESIDENTS
FOLLOWING NEXEN CORRIDOR
IMPROVEMENT PROJECT.
THE CITY OF AJDABIYA HAS POSTED
THE VIDEO AND THE PROPOSED ROAD
DESIGN ON THE PROJECT PAGE WWT
TO GOVERN ORGANIC'S IN PLEASE
REVIEW THE MATERIALS AND ATTEND
A VIRTUAL OFFICE OR A VIRTUAL
SESSION TO LEARN MORE ABOUT THE
PROJECT AND ASK QUESTIONS.
VIRTUAL OFFICE HOURS WILL BE
WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 21ST FROM
ELEVEN THIRTY A.M. TO ONE P.M.
AND THURSDAY AUGUST 22ND FROM
SEVEN TO EIGHT THIRTY PM.
THERE WILL ALSO BE A VIRTUAL
SESSION WEDNESDAY SEPTEMBER
18TH FROM SEVEN TO EIGHT THIRTY
PM.
SO ONCE AGAIN YOU CAN CHECK THE
PROJECT PAGE EIGHT TO GOVCO OGT
NEXEN FOR THE ZOOME LINK ON THE
DAY OF THE EVENT.
THANKS COULSON FOR IA THANK YOU
.
>> I TOO WANT TO THANK THE
CLERIC FOR EXECUTING ANOTHER
FLAWLESS ELECTION HERE IN ANN
ARBOR AND I ESPECIALLY WANT TO
THANK VOTERS ABOARD FOR FOR THE
SUPPORT IN IN IN MY PERSONAL
ELECTION AND JUST SAY THAT I'M
REALLY EXCITED TO HAVE THAT
SUPPORT AND TO BE RETURNING TO
COUNCIL AND CONTINUING THE
GREAT WORK THAT WE'RE DOING
HERE AND I'M LOOKING FORWARD TO
CONTINUING TO WORK HARD FOR ALL
RESIDENTS OF WARD FOUR IN ANN
ARBOR EVERSOLE.
>> I'M SORRY TO HAVE MISSED
SOME OF THE PUBLIC COMMENTS.
I WAS COMING FROM AN EVENT THAT
CONGRESSMAN DINGELL HAD INVITED
ME TO PARTICIPATE IN DETROIT
WELCOMING MINORITY HOUSE LEADER
HAKEEM JEFFRIES TO MICHIGAN.
I WANT TO SPEAK TO A RALLY THAT
WAS HERE IN MICHIGAN YESTERDAY
AND A NUMBER OF YOU ATTENDED
AND I FEEL LIKE THAT WAS
HISTORY IN THE MAKING.
SO AS WE REFLECT ON THE THE THE
PRIMARIES I AM SO PROUD OF ANN
ARBOR FOR DEMONSTRATING WHAT IT
MEANS TO BE A DEMOCRAT AND HERE
IN OUR CITY WE HELPED A NUMBER
OF FOLKS IN THEIR CONGRESSIONAL
RACES AND A MESSAGE THAT I'M
BRINGING BACK FROM THIS EVENT
WAS THAT HERE WHERE WE CAN PAVE
THE WAY TO RESTORE FAITH AND
CONFIDENCE IN OUR DEMOCRACY.
WE ARE ALSO HELPING OUR
CONGRESSIONAL CANDIDATES FIGHT
OFF THE CHANCE OF NOT HAVING
THESE ELECTIONS ACTUALLY
CERTIFIED.
>> SO IF WE HAVE A
CONGRESSIONAL MAJORITY,
DEMOCRATIC MAJORITY, WE THAT
SPECTER WON'T BE HANGING OVER
US SO I KNOW IT'S BUSY TIMES,
IT'S CONFUSING TIMES BUT IT'S
PRETTY CLEAR WHAT IT MEANS TO
BE A DEMOCRATIC PARTY MEMBER
HERE IN ANN ARBOR AND I'M
REALLY THANKFUL FOR THE FOLKS
WHO TOOK THEIR TIME AND
COMMITTED TO HELPING OTHER
CANDIDATES ACROSS THE STATE IN
OUR COMMUNITY TO UPLIFT THOSE
VALUES.
FURTHER COMMUNICATION FROM
KELSALL
.
I WOULD LIKE TO REQUEST
CONFIRMATION OF FOLLOWING
APPOINTMENT THAT WAS PRESENTED
TO CITY COUNCIL ON JULY 15,
2024 TO THE ZONING BOARD
OF APPEALS PATRICIA MAKOWSKI,
MEMBER MOTION PLEASE MOVE BY
COUNCIL REDUCING MY COUNCIL
MEMBER WATSA DISCUSSION A
FAVORITE POST IS APPROVED.
I'D ALSO LIKE TO NOMINATE THE
FOLLOWING APPOINTMENT FOR
APPROVAL ON A ONE STEP PROCESS
TO THE STATE STREET BUSINESS
IMPROVEMENT ZONE.
>> AMY KARBO MADE A MOTION NO
ACTION TAKEN BY COUNCILOR PRIOR
DISCUSSION ON CABER PROPOSED IS
APPROVED WITH TEN COUNCIL
MEMBERS PRESENT ALL VOTING
AFFIRMATIVE SATISFYING THE
EIGHT VOTE REQUIREMENT FOR MY
PART I ALSO TOO WOULD LIKE TO
THANK THE CLERK AND ALL MEMBERS
OF CITY STAFF WHO HAVE
PARTICIPATED IN THE ELECTION IS
WHETHER YOU ARE A PERMANENT
STAFF MEMBER OR WHETHER YOU ARE
HERE TO SUPPORT OUR ELECTIONS.
I KNOW IT'S A THING THAT MANY
FOLKS IN OUR COMMUNITY LIKE TO
DO.
THEY ENJOY PARTICIPATING IN
LOCAL GOVERNMENT THROUGH
SUPPORT OF OUR ELECTIONS
, THE
STAFFING AND IT'S IT'S A WELL
AN EXCELLENT THING TO DO AND WE
HERE IN ANN ARBOR ARE SO
FORTUNATE TO HAVE A CLERK'S
OFFICE THAT FOCUSES ON FREE AND
FAIR EFFICIENT ELECTIONS WITH
AN EFFORT TO BROADEN THE
OPPORTUNITY TO VOTE TO SO MANY
THROUGHOUT OUR COMMUNITY,
MAKING IT EASIER FOR PEOPLE TO
COME AND HAVE THEIR VOICES
HEARD.
WE NOW COME TO THE CONSENT
AGENDA THE MOTION PLEASE TO
APPROVE THE CONCEPT GENDER MOVE
BY COUNCILOR REGINA SUNG BY
COUNCILOR SONG DISCUSSION
OF THE CONSENT AGENDA COUNCIL
MEMBER BRAKE'S HERE FIRST I
JUST WANTED TO DRAW ATTENTION
TO TO THREE AND FOUR AND MENTAL
HEALTH ONCE AGAIN HOW
INCREDIBLY EXCITED I AM TO SEE
THIS INDUSTRY AND TELL BETWEEN
FATAH THE ENEMY ARE THEY
ACTUALLY IT IS SOMETHING YOU
HAVE BEEN WAITING FOR YEARS AND
IT IS SUCH AN INCREDIBLE
CONNECTION IN OUR COMMUNITY.
SO THAT IS SUPER EXCITING AND I
SHOULD HAVE HAD IT OPEN AT
I
WANTED TO READ SOMETHING ABOUT
415 WEST WASHINGTON DC
DIPLOMATIC A FAIR AMOUNT
OF QUESTIONS ABOUT SORT
OF ENSURING THAT THE CHIMNEY
SWEEPS ARE GOING TO BE
PROTECTED THERE AND AS ONE
SPEAKER MENTIONED, THE
DEMOLITION THIS IS BEING FULLY
TAKEN INTO ACCOUNT THAT YOU
CHIMNEY DURING DURING
DEMOLITION THE CONTRACTORS WILL
REPAIR THE CHIMNEY WHERE WHERE
NECESSARY BUT HAVE BEEN
INSTRUCTED NOT TO DISTURB THE
CHIMNEY OR THE AREA AROUND THE
CHIMNEY WHILE THE CHIMNEY
SWEEPS ARE INSIDE IT AND THE
STAFF ISN'T STRESSED.
THE IMPORTANCE OF CHIMNEY
PRESERVATION AT THE FREEBIRD
PRE-BID NOT PREVERT PRE-BID
HEATING WITH CONTRACTORS AND WE
ALSO DISCUSSED MEANS AND
METHODS.
ASK THE PRECONSTRUCTION MEETING
WITH THE CONTRACTOR.
SO APPRECIATE STAFF SHARING A
LITTLE BIT MORE INFORMATION
WITH ME ABOUT THAT AND FOLKS
CAN REST ASSURED THAT THAT IS
FULLY BEING CONTEMPLATED IN
THIS PROCESS.
>> COUNCIL MEMBER DISH.
I WOULD ALSO LIKE TO EXPRESS
ENTHUSIASM ABOUT CO2 AND THE
RELATED ITEMS ASSOCIATED WITH
BUILDING THE THE VANDERMEER
TUNNEL AND I JUST WANT TO BE
REALLY OR JUST GRATEFUL TO
RECOGNIZE THE COOPERATION
OF THE COUNTY AND ALSO THE
ADVOCACY THE HURON.
WHAT ARE THE PATHWAYS
INITIATIVE WHICH IS A
GRASSROOTS GROUP FOR RESIDENT
GROUPS WHO'VE BEEN WONDERFUL ON
THIS ISSUE AS FAR AS WE KNOW.
I ALSO WANT TO SAY THAT I'M
REALLY EXCITED ABOUT 017.
I AM THRILLED THAT WE WILL MAKE
AN RFP FOR THE NET ZERO FIRE
STATION WHICH IS A MODEL
PROJECT AND I'M VERY
ENTHUSIASTIC ABOUT THE
POTENTIAL FOR THE CITY TO SELL
BONDS TO FINANCE THE COST
DEPENDING ON WHAT THE COST
ESTIMATE COMES BACK TO BE AND
THEN FINALLY JUST TO UNDERSCORE
SOMETHING THAT OUR MARVELOUS
CLARK JACKIE BEAUDRY POUDRE I
MENTIONED A MOMENT AGO THAT THE
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN MUSEUM
OF ART AND DUE TO START CENTER
ON NORTH CAMPUS WILL OPERATE AS
FULL SATELLITE CLERK'S OFFICES
AND EARLY VOTING CENTERS AS
WELL AS VOTING CENTERS ON THE
DAY OF THE ELECTION.
I KNOW THERE ARE NO UNIVERSITY
OF MICHIGAN STUDENTS LISTENING
TO THIS BUT MAYBE THE I WILL
SUMMARIZE THAT AND THEY WILL
ALL KNOW WHAT TO DO FURTHER
DISCUSSION OF THE CONSENT
AGENDA.
I LIKE TO PILE ON MY PRAISE TO
THE THE AFOREMENTIONED ITEMS
THE IMPROVEMENTS AT BARTON
BENDEMEER IS GOING TO BE
TRANSFORMATIONAL
TRANSFORMATIONAL FOR SO MANY IN
THE COMMUNITY.
LOVE TO USE THE WORD AUDIT
TRAIL.
WE WANT TO EXPAND UPON IT AND I
AM INCREDIBLY EXCITED ABOUT THE
VARIOUS I MEAN LOOK ONLY IN
LOCAL GOVERNMENT YOU TAKE ASIDE
ABOUT DEMOLITIONS BUT HONESTLY
THESE ARE THESE ARE STRUCTURES
THAT HAVE LONG BEEN BLIGHTS
THROUGHOUT THROUGHOUT OUR
COMMUNITY.
WE'VE LONG LOOKED TO HAVE HAVE
SOMETHING PLEASE SOMETHING DONE
WITH THEM AND THE DEMOLITION
OF THEM IS INDEED A FIRST AND
NECESSARY STEP.
AND SO I'M GLAD WE'RE MOVING IT
FORWARD HERE.
THANK YOU TO STAFF FOR GETTING
THAT DONE.
FURTHER DISCUSSION ON FAVOR
OPPOSED THE CONSENT AGENDA IS
APPROVED WITH TEN COUNCIL
MEMBERS PRESENT ALL VOTED IN
THE AFFIRMATIVE THAT SATISFIED
THE EIGHT VOTE REQUIREMENT WITH
RESPECT TO SEE A THREE SEEI
FOUR 06 07
THAT IS ALL NCEA
TWELVE I AM REMINDED THAT YOU
KNOW PUBLIC HEARINGS TODAY AND
SO MAY HAVE THE MOTION PLEASE
TO APPROVE THE REGULAR SESSION
MEETING MINUTES OF JULY FIFTEEN
TWENTY TWENTY FOUR MOVE BY
COUNCIL MEMBER WATSON SECOND BY
COUNCIL MEMBER BECAUSE HE HAD
ONE DISCUSSION OF THE MINUTES
ON FABER POST MINUTES APPROVED
SEE WHAT AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND
SECTION FIVE TEN PART TWO
OF CHAPTER FIFTY FIVE UNIFIED
BUILDING CODE OF TITLE FIVE THE
CODE OF THE CITY BANABA
REZONING A FIFTY NINE ACRES IN
THE WASHTENAW AVENUE E STADIUM
BOULEVARD AREAS TO TAKE ONE
TRANSIT CARTER DISTRICT MOVE BY
COUNCIL MEMBER DISH SECOND BY
COUNCIL MEMBER WATSON
DISCUSSION PLEASE SEE ONE
COUNCILOR BRITISH.
I KNOW THAT WE ARE ALL PLEASED
TO SEE THIS FOURTH AND FINAL
OF OUR PLANNED SO FAR ONE
REZONING IN THE WASHTENAW AREA.
THIS WILL BE 41 PARCELS OF LAND
COVERING 88 ACRES LOCATED
BETWEEN US TWENTY THREE AND
THAT ROAD AND ALONG IS STADIUM
EIGHTEEN PARCELS COVERING
FOURTEEN POINT EIGHT ACRES AND
GENERALLY BETWEEN WASHTENAW AND
SAY FOR US FRANCIS BOULEVARD
THOSE OF YOU WHO KNOW THIS AREA
WELL KNOW THAT THERE IS A
UNIQUE FEATURE ON THE SOUTH
SIDE OF WASHTENAW AVENUE BEFORE
IT REACHES EAST STADIUM AND
THAT IS A SERVICE ALLEY BETWEEN
PITTSFIELD BOULEVARD AND S01
PARKWAY.
THIS PORTION IS NOT PROPOSED TO
BE DESIGNATED TO SEE ONE STREET
TYPE.
IT WILL REMAIN C THREE WHICH IS
A MIXED USE DISTRICT SO THAT'S
COMPATIBLE WITH WHERE WE'RE
GOING AND THIS BLOCK IT'S
JUDGED THAT THIS BLOCK THIS ONE
BLOCK DOESN'T NEED TO SEE ONE
ZONING TO PRESERVE PEDESTRIAN
AMENITY SPACE.
>> SO THERE'S REALLY ONLY ONE
KEY DIFFERENCE WITH THE T7 ZONE
IS THAT IS THAT AS C THREE
WOULD STILL BE MIXED USE BUT
THE MAXIMUM HEIGHT THAT COULD
BE REACHED THERE IS FIFTY FIVE
FEET AS OPPOSED TO TAKE ONE
A.C. ONE WOULD ALLOW A MAXIMUM
OF SEVENTY FIVE FEET AT THE
POINT THAT IS EIGHTY THAT IS
EIGHTY TO THREE HUNDRED FEET
REMOVED FROM A RESIDENTIAL
AREA.
I KNOW THAT'S CONFUSING THAT
ONE GRADUATES AS YOU ALL KNOW
TO HIGHER HEIGHTS THE FARTHER
IT IS FROM A RESIDENTIAL AREA.
SO WE'RE REALLY THE POINT IS
THAT WE'RE REALLY NOT LOSING
VERY MUCH BY THIS LITTLE BIT AS
WE HAVE DISCUSSED BEFORE AND
I'M GOING TO BE BRIEF BECAUSE
WE'LL HAVE A PUBLIC HEARING AND
EVERYTHING NEXT TIME.
BUT I JUST WANT TO GET ON THE
RECORD THAT TICK ONE BETTER
ACHIEVES A VARIETY OF DIFFERENT
GOALS THAT ARE STATED IN OUR
CURRENT COMPREHENSIVE PLAN THAN
THE CURRENT ZONING OF THE
PARCELS ON THIS CORRIDOR.
DO.
>> THE OVERARCHING GOAL IS FOR
ALREADY DEVELOPED AREAS TO WORK
MORE EFFICIENTLY AND FOR A
BROADER RANGE OF CUSTOMERS,
RESIDENTS, EMPLOYERS AND
EMPLOYEES.
AND ABOVE ALL WE HOPE THAT WE
CAN PUT THINGS THAT HOUSE
PEOPLE ON THINGS THAT CURRENTLY
HOUSE CARS THAT IS RESIDENTIAL
PROJECTS ON PARKING LOTS.
NOW THIS REFLECTS THE VALUES
OF OUR PRESENT ERA IN WHICH WE
WISH TO MAKE A TRANSITION AWAY
FROM AUTO CENTRIC LAND USES.
THE FEATURES OF ONE INCLUDE
ENABLING HIGHER DENSITY LAND
USES AND REQUIRING SMALLER
FOOTPRINTS WHICH SUPPORTS THE
PEDESTRIAN FRIENDLY LANDSCAPE
BECAUSE THERE ARE SHORTER
DISTANCES BETWEEN DESTINATIONS
WHICH CAN BE MORE COMFORTABLY
CROSSED BY FOOT.
ONE FOCUS HAS STANDARDS ON
BUILDING FORM WHICH MAKES IT
MUCH EASIER TO CONVERT SHOPPING
CENTERS OR OFFICE COMPLEXES
INTO MIXED USE.
AND IT REQUIRES SITES WHERE
PARKING LOTS ARE NOT THE
DOMINANT FEATURE.
NOT ONLY DOES IT LIMIT SERVICE
SIZE LOTS BUT IT PROHIBITS THE
PLACEMENT OF THE LOT BETWEEN
THE BUILDING AND THE TRANSIT
CORRIDOR SO I STRONGLY URGE YOU
ALL TO MOVE THIS ON TO SECOND
READING KNOWING HOW MANY OF OUR
GOALS THAT IT ACHIEVES OR
ADVANCES FURTHER DISCUSSION
OF C1 COUNCILOR WATSON WOULD
LIKE TO THANK THE PLANNING
COMMISSION PLANNING STAFF AND
MODISH FOR THEIR WORK ON THIS
AND THEIR WORK EXPLAINING THIS.
BUT YOU KNOW I'M HAPPY TO SEE
THIS COME FORWARD.
TAKE ONE ISN'T ABOUT IMMEDIATE
CHANGE TO THESE CORRIDORS BUT
RATHER ABOUT INFLUENCING WHAT
COMES NEXT.
WE DON'T WANT STRIP MALL
DEVELOPMENT TO BE REPLACED WITH
MORE STRIP MALL DEVELOPMENT.
THIS CATEGORY HAS BEEN VETTED
BY STAFF AND IS INTENDED TO
INCREASE HOUSING ACCESS AND
CHOICE AFFORDABILITY AND
OPTIONS ALONG TRANSIT
CORRIDORS.
OUR COMMUNITY CAN SUPPORT MORE
WALKABLE TRANSIT ORIENTED
DEVELOPMENT.
YOU KNOW I'VE HEARD OF CONCERNS
ABOUT BUILDING HEIGHT IN THE
COMMUNITY BUT I JUST WANT TO
REITERATE THAT MAXIMUM BUILDING
HEIGHTS IN THIS AREA ARE IN
LINE WITH CURRENT ZONING
DESIGNATIONS WHEN NEAR
RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS.
BUT THEN WHEN FAR FROM
RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
THE MAXIMUM HEIGHTS PERMITTED
IN THE DC ONE DISTRICT ARE
GREATER THAN THE COMMERCIAL AND
HOTEL DISTRICTS BUT ARE LESS
THAN THE OFFICE OAL ARE
DISTRICTS THAT ALREADY EXIST ON
THE CORRIDOR.
>> SO I ENCOURAGE ENCOURAGE
RESIDENTS INTERESTED IN THE
ALLOWABLE HEIGHTS IN THESE
CORRIDORS TO VIEW THE
INTERACTIVE MAPPING TOOL AT
PLANNED TO START PLANNING TO
GOVCO TUQAY ONE CORRIDOR'S
PLANNED TO COVERGIRL AQUALUNG
CORRIDORS AND THERE'S A LITTLE
MAPPING TOOL AND YOU CAN SEE
LINES AND DISTANCES THAT SHOW
HOW TALL BUILDINGS WILL BE.
>> THANK YOU FOR THE DISCUSSION
.
THAT'S OUR SONG
I'LL BE LESS TECHNICAL IF ONLY
BECAUSE I THIS IS LONG IN
COMING AND THIS BORDER SEVERAL
AWARDS FOR COUNCIL MEMBER
WATSONIA MYSELF FOR WARD TWO
THIS IS A SIGNIFICANT
ADVANCEMENT IN JUST TALKING
ABOUT WHAT CHANGE CAN COME TO
COMMUNITY EVEN THOUGH IT WON'T
BE FINANCED AND BUILT AND
APPEAR BEFORE YOUR EYES IN SOME
TIME BECAUSE FINANCING IS THIS
DIFFICULT AND THESE ARE NOT
PUBLIC PARCELS I WOULD LOVE IT
IF IF OUR COMMUNITY COULD
IMAGINE THE PEOPLE WHO COULD
POTENTIALLY LIVE HERE AND THE
LAST TIME WE DID COMMITTEE
ENGAGEMENT ALONG THIS STRETCH
ABOUT WASHTENAW WE ACTUALLY HAD
A NEW YOUNG RESIDENT WHO IS A
YOUNG PROFESSIONAL HERE WHO HAD
PREVIOUSLY HAD TO COMMUTE BUT
MADE IT A POINT TO RIDE HIS
BIKE TO THIS MEETING TO SAY
THAT I AM A NEW NEIGHBOR AND
THIS IS THIS KIND OF HOUSING
WOULD HELP ME STAY IN THE CITY
LONGER.
THAT'S THAT'S ALSO A VALUABLE
CONVERSATION TO HAVE AND WHO WE
CAN WELCOME HERE TO THE CITY TO
STAY LONGER AND NOT HAVE TO
COMMUTE IMPEDE TRAFFIC.
IT'S ACTUALLY YOUR NEIGHBOR
ESCUTIA ALSO VERY DENHA THANKS.
I'LL BE RELATIVELY BRIEF.
I JUST WANT TO AS ANOTHER
COUNCIL MEMBER REPRESENTING A
PORTION OF THIS AREA.
I JUST WANT TO THANK STAFF FOR
ALL OF THEIR HARD WORK AND
PLANNING AND COUNCIL MEMBERS
ENGAGED.
YOU KNOW WE'VE SPOKEN ABOUT
THIS A LOT BEFORE AND THIS IS A
LONG TIME COMING.
I'M REALLY GRATEFUL TO FINALLY
HAVE THE OPPORTUNITY TO TO VOTE
ON THIS TONIGHT AND TO TO MOVE
IT FORWARD.
I THINK WE'VE TALKED A LOT
ABOUT WHERE DEVELOPMENT MAKES
SENSE IN OUR COMMUNITY AND THIS
IS AN AREA WHERE IT'S SIMPLY
YOU KNOW, JUST MAKES A LOT
OF SENSE ALONG MAJOR TRANSIT
CORRIDORS AND IT'S AN OBJECTIVE
AND A GOAL OF OURS SINCE I
JOINED THE COUNCIL AND LOOKING
FORWARD TO TO SEEING THIS
CONTINUE TO MOVE FORWARD THE
DISCUSSION COUNCIL MEMBER,
THANK YOU.
>> I TOO WILL BE BRIEF BECAUSE
MUCH HAS ALREADY BEEN SAID BUT
I DID WANT TO JUST CONNECT THAT
OR MAKE THE POINT THAT THIS IS
THIS IS NOT UNIQUE TO INTERPRET
THIS INITIATIVE, THIS TRANSIT
ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT INITIATIVE
.
OF COURSE WE'VE HAD MANY
CONVERSATIONS ABOUT THIS AS
WE'VE MADE THIS ZONING
DESIGNATION AVAILABLE IN
DIFFERENT AREAS OF THE CITY.
BUT I DO THINK IT'S IMPORTANT
EACH TIME WE DO THIS TO REMIND
THE COMMUNITY THAT WE ARE
ANSWERING A CALL FROM PRESIDENT
BIDEN AND VICE PRESIDENT HARRIS
WHEN WE DO THIS.
>> THIS IS OF COURSE THIS IS AN
IDEA THAT HAS PERCOLATED IN OUR
COMMUNITY.
IT'S BEEN PART OF OUR PLANS FOR
YEARS BUT IT IS VERY
SPECIFICALLY PART OF PRESIDENT
BIDEN OR THE BIDEN HARRIS
ADMINISTRATION'S HOUSING SUPPLY
ACTION PLAN.
AND AND SO BY ENACTING THIS IN
THIS AREA AND IN DIFFERENT
TRANSIT HEAVY AREAS THROUGHOUT
THE CITY, WE ARE NOT ONLY DOING
WHAT WE NEED TO DO TO ENABLE
ADDITIONAL DENSITY WHERE IT
MAKES SENSE THROUGHOUT OUR CITY
BUT WE ARE ALSO ANSWERING THE
CALL OF OUR OF OUR FEDERAL
LEADERS AND AND I WOULD SAY OUR
STATE LEADERS AS WELL.
YOU KNOW, GOVERNOR WHITMORE'S
NEW TAGLINE SEEMS TO BE BUILD
MAYBE BUILD NOW THAT WE'RE
ALREADY FIXING THE ROADS.
SO THIS IS IMPORTANT HOUSING.
WE ARE IN A HOUSING CRISIS AND
AND THIS IS A GREAT STEP THAT
WE CAN TAKE TO INCREASE DENSITY
IN OUR CITY WHERE IT REALLY,
REALLY MAKES SENSE.
>> THANK YOU FOR THE DISCUSSION
ON FATER POSED IT IS APPROVED
DC ONE RESOLUTION TO ACCEPT
CARBON REDUCTION RESOLUTION TO
ACCEPT CARBON REDUCTION PROGRAM
GRANT FUNDS FROM SOUTHEAST
MICHIGAN COUNCIL OF GOVERNMENTS
EXECUTE A CONTRACT WITH DTC
ENERGY TO CONVERT DTA
STREETLIGHTS TO LED TECHNOLOGY
IN THE AMOUNT OF ONE MILLION
250000 DOLLARS AND APPROPRIATE
FUNDING BY COUNCIL MEMBER.
THERE'S SECOND ADVISORY COUNCIL
MEMBER DENHA DISCUSSION OF DC
ONE I BELIEVE WE HAVE A STAFF
INTRODUCTION.
THANK YOU MAYOR.
STAFF IS BEING BROUGHT FORWARD
.
THIS IS A CONTINUATION OF AN
ITEM THAT WAS ADDRESSED THE
PREVIOUSLY A COUPLE OF WEEKS
AGO THERE WERE SOME ADDITIONAL
QUESTIONS AND ADDITIONAL WORK
THAT STAFF WAS ASKED TO DO.
ONE OF THE THINGS WE TRY TO
PRIDE OURSELVES ON IS BEING
PROFESSIONAL AT ALL TIMES AND
PROVIDING CLARITY TO
POLICYMAKERS AND IN BRINGING
FORTH OUR BEST PROFESSIONAL
JUDGMENT WE BELIEVE THAT WE'RE
ABLE TO DO THAT THIS EVENING.
THE OVERALL REQUEST THAT WE'RE
ASKING FOR IS THAT A DECISION
TO BE MADE ON THE SIDE OF THERE
IS A HARD DEADLINE OF SEPTEMBER
30TH IN ORDER TO COMPLY WITH
ALL OF THE GRANT REQUIREMENTS.
THERE'S A NUMBER
OF ADMINISTRATIVE STEPS THAT WE
WOULD HAVE TO CONDUCT IF WE'RE
GOING TO GO FORWARD AND
WHATEVER THE DECISION OF THE
COUNCIL IS, WE WILL CERTAINLY
EXECUTE IT WITH STUART.
GOOD EVENING.
MY NAME IS SKYE STEWART.
I'M THE CHIEF OF STAFF FOR THE
PUBLIC SERVICES AREA.
STAFF RECEIVED SEVERAL
QUESTIONS RELATED THE
CARBON REDUCTION PROGRAM GRANT
FUNDS AND THE CONTRACT WITH
ALITY TO CONVERT ITS REMAINING
NON LEDS STREETLIGHTS IN THE
CITY TO LEIDY STAFF HAVE
PROVIDED SOME WRITTEN RESPONSE
IN THE COUNCIL AGENDA A
RESPONSE MEMO ON JULY 11TH AND
IN A STAFF MEMO ATTACHED TO
THIS ITEM AND LET US START
EARLIER THIS WEEK I WILL NOW
PROVIDE RESPONSES TO ADDITIONAL
SEVEN QUESTIONS POSED BY
COUNCIL MEMBERS IN THE LAST TWO
DAYS QUESTION SINCE STAFF SUING
SINCE CITY STAFF WILL ALREADY
BE ORDERING AND MANAGING THE
SPECIAL ORDER STOCK FOR TO FOR
MULTIPLE DIFFERENT FIXTURE
TYPES, MANAGING A MAP, ETC. HOW
DOES ADDING THE SECOND BULB
TYPE GENERATE ENOUGH WORK TO
REQUIRE ANOTHER EMPTY?
ONE OF THE BENEFITS OF LED
BULBS IS SUPPOSED TO BE
LONGEVITY RESPONSE STAFF
RESPONDED TO ELEMENTS OF THIS
QUESTION AT THE LAST COUNCIL
MEETING AND IN PRIOR
COMMUNICATIONS SELECTING A
SINGLE UNIFORM COPPERHEAD STYLE
FIXTURE AND WATTAGE FOR THE
VAST MAJORITY OF OUR CITY
LIGHTS TO EXCUSE ME OUR VAST
MAJORITY OF STREETLIGHTS
INCLUDED IN THIS CONVERSION
WOULD SIGNIFICANTLY SIMPLIFY
AND LIMIT CITY STAFF TIME
REQUIRED FOR BOTH THE INITIAL
INSTALLATION AND FOR A LONGER
TERM INVENTORY MANAGEMENT AS
LIGHTS INEVITABLY FAIL AND NEED
TO BE REPLACED WHILE FIXTURES
ARE EXPECTED TO HAVE A LONG
LIFE.
IN FACT WE HAVE A TEN YEAR
WARRANTY RECOMMENDED FIXTURE
LIGHTNING STRIKES, VEHICLE
KNOCK DOWNS AND OTHER ISSUES
LIKE PREMATURE FAILURES CAN
OCCUR AT ANY TIME IN THE LIFE
CYCLE WHICH CAN NECESSITATE A
REPLACEMENT.
WE DO EXPECT TO SEE THE
INVENTORY MANAGEMENT WORK
RELATED TO SPECIAL ORDER
MATERIALS TO INCREASE OVER TIME
AS THE FIXTURES AGE AS WE MOVED
AWAY FROM PLANNING TO USE
STANDARD FIXTURES FOR THIS
CONVERSION PROJECT TO REALIZING
WE WOULD NEED TO MANAGE A
SPECIAL ORDER REPLACEMENT
INVENTORY IN PERPETUITY, STAFF
DID EXPECT TO HAVE TO FIND A
WAY TO ABSORB THE EXTRA EFFORT
WITHOUT KNOWING WHAT THOSE
INDIRECT STAFFING COSTS MAY
LOOK LIKE IN THE SHORT AND LONG
TERM.
HOWEVER, STAFF KNOW BASED ON
EXISTING WORKLOAD AND
RESPONSIBILITIES THAT THERE IS
NOT CURRENT CAPACITY TO ABSORB
MANAGING EVEN MORE COMPLEXITY
WITH THIS PROJECT BY FURTHER
STRATIFYING BELONG TO OUR TERM
INVENTORY MANAGEMENT WORK AND
INCREASING THE UP FRONT STREET
BY STREET KUAC EFFORT NEEDED TO
CONFIRM A SPECIFIC LIGHT
FIXTURE A SPECIFIC LOCATION THE
ESTIMATE OF APPROXIMATELY ONE
AND A HALF AFTER USE THAT
INCLUDED A LIGHTING ENGINEER
AND A PART TIME INVENTORY
MANAGEMENT POSITION WAS A
BALLPARK ATTEMPT AT IDENTIFYING
CAPACITY CONSTRAINTS AND
EXPERTIZE GAPS THAT LIMIT THE
CITY'S ABILITY TO GET MORE
INVOLVED IN THE LIGHTING
NETWORK DESIGN WITH DETI ON
THEIR STREET LIGHTS QUESTION
TWO IT'S MY UNDERSTANDING THAT
ONE OF THE PREVIOUS BARRIERS TO
MANAGING TWO DIFFERENT WATTAGE
BULBS WAS THE COSTS ASSOCIATED
WITH MAINTAINING THE STOCK
REQUIRED THE CITY TO HAVE ON
HAND BASED ON CONVERSATIONS
WITH CITY STAFF.
IT SOUNDS LIKE IT WAS THIS WAS
AN ISSUE THEY WERE WILLING TO
NEGOTIATE ON TO REDUCE COSTS
FOR THE CITY.
IS THAT ALSO YOUR UNDERSTANDING
RESPONSE PRIOR TO BRINGING THIS
ITEM TO COUNCIL FOR
CONSIDERATION, CITY STAFF
SUCCESSFULLY NEGOTIATED WITH
DUTY TO REDUCE THEIR STANDARD
BACK STOCK INVENTORY PERCENTAGE
FOR THESE SPECIAL ORDER
MATERIALS FROM 10 PERCENT TO
TWO PERCENT WHICH REPRESENTS A
DIFFERENCE AND NEEDING TO
MANAGE AND FIND SPACE FOR
APPROXIMATELY ONE 400 EXTRA
COPPERHEAD FIXTURES AT ANY
GIVEN TIME TO ONLY NEEDING TO
FIND SPACE FOR ABOUT 80 EXTRA
OVERHEAD FIXTURES AT ANY TIME.
>> SO I KNOW THIS COULD BE THE
DIFFERENCE IN NEEDING TO RENT
OR BUY A SHIPPING CONTAINER TO
STORE FOUR HUNDRED FIXTURES OR
VERSUS PERHAPS UTILIZING
EXISTING INTERIOR TO STORE A
COUPLE OF PALLETS OF FIXTURES.
AGREED STAFF'S REQUEST BUT DID
PROVIDE THE CAVEAT THAT WHILE
WE MAY BE ABLE TO REDUCE THE
AMOUNT OF PHYSICAL SPACE AND
COST WE NEED TO STORE THESE
FIXTURES, THERE IS A GREATER
RISK THAT IS INVENTORY LEVELS
DECREASE.
WE MAY NOT HAVE THE RIGHT
PICTURE IN HAND WHEN AN OUTAGE
OCCURS WHICH WOULD EITHER SLOW
DTRS RESPONSIVENESS TO OUTAGES
OR ALTERNATIVELY THEY COULD
REPLACE WITH A LIGHT WITH ONE
OF THEIR STANDARD FIXTURES
THAT'S IN STOCK DTG MADE NO
FURTHER OFFER SPECIFIC TO
INVENTORY MANAGEMENT IN OUR
DISCUSSIONS WITH THEM.
QUESTION THREE WHAT THE ANNUAL
ANTICIPATED SAVINGS FROM
CONVERTING TO FIFTY EIGHT WHAT
TWENTY SEVEN HUNDRED KELVIN
BULBS ACROSS THE CITY WHAT FINE
WILL REALIZE THIS ADDITIONAL
REVENUE RESPONSE IN FEBRUARY
TWENTY TWENTY THREE AT THE TIME
WE APPLIED FOR THE GRANT DTA
STAFF ESTIMATED THAT THIS
CONVERSION PROJECT WOULD RESULT
IN AN ESTIMATED SAVINGS
OF AROUND THREE HUNDRED
THOUSAND DOLLARS PER YEAR.
THIS WOULD BE SAVINGS TO THE
GENERAL FUND.
THE BULK OF THE SAVINGS IS DUE
TO THE CONVERSION FROM A LESS
EFFICIENT LIGHT TO MORE
EFFICIENT OLD FIXTURE INDICATED
TO STAFF THAT SAVINGS DUE TO
DIFFERENCES BETWEEN LCD
FIXTURES WHETHER WATER OR
LUMENS WOULD BE NOVEL QUESTION
STABBING COST QUESTION FOR IN
ADDITION, IF AN ADDITIONAL FTE
IS REQUIRED TO MANAGE THE
DEVICE, WHAT WOULD THE
ANTICIPATED SALARY BE FOR SUCH
POSITIONS?
ARE THERE ANY SPECIAL REVENUE
FUNDS THAT COULD BE UTILIZED TO
FULLY OR PARTIALLY ON THIS
POSITION?
ARE THERE OTHER UNMET PUBLIC
SERVICES NEEDS THAT COULD BE
LOGICALLY BUILT INTO THIS ROLE
THAT WOULD BE BENEFIT TO THE
CITY ALSO COULD BE FUNDED
OUTSIDE OF THE GENERAL FUND
RESPONSE OTHER THAN IDENTIFYING
THE LIKELY STAFFING NEEDS FOR A
MORE ROBUST CO MANAGEMENT
OF FIXTURES, STAFF CANNOT
PROVIDE A MORE SPECIFIC ANSWER
OR RESPONSE AT THIS TIME.
THE CURRENT RECOMMENDATION FOR
COUNCIL DOES NOT INCLUDE ANY
NEW FEES AND SO NO RESEARCH OR
ANALYSIS HAS BEEN DONE TO
ESTIMATE THE SALARIES OF THOSE
POSITIONS STAFFS PRIOR
RESPONSES TO THIS TYPE
OF QUESTION ABOUT STAFFING
NEEDS ESTIMATED AGAIN ONE ABOUT
ONE AND A HALF FEET NEEDS OVER
TIME.
THAT WAS AN ATTEMPT AGAIN AT
IDENTIFYING CAPACITY
CONSTRAINTS AND EXPERTIZE GAPS
THAT LIMIT THE CITY'S ABILITY
TO GET MORE INVOLVED IN THE
LIGHTING NETWORK DESIGN WITH ON
THEIR STREET LIGHTS.
STAFF ARE NOT AWARE ANY SPECIAL
REVENUE FUNDS THAT COULD BE
USED TO FUND PART OR ALL OF ANY
POSITIONS RELATED TO THIS WORK
QUESTION BY POSTPONEMENT
CONSIDERATIONS TO MEET THE
GRANT DEADLINE.
WHAT IS THE LATEST COUNCIL
MEETING ABOUT WHICH COUNCIL
MUST VOTE TO APPROVE THE GRANT
IF WE WISH TO RECEIVE THESE
FUNDS?
RESPONSE STAFF HAS BEEN ADVISED
BY SIMCOCK AND MODOT THAT IN
ORDER TO SECURE THE GRANT THE
THAT IN ORDER TO SECURE THE
GRANT THE FUNDS NEED TO BE
OBLIGATED AND THE PROJECT
UNDERWAY BY SEPTEMBER 30TH A
DECISION ON WHETHER TO ACCEPT
THESE CARBON REDUCTION FUNDS
NEEDS TO BE MADE TONIGHT FOR
STAFF TO BE ABLE TO MOVE
FORWARD WITH THE ADMINISTRATIVE
TASK ASSOCIATED WITH GETTING
THESE FUNDS OBLIGATED BY THE
DEADLINE.
EXECUTION OF THE CONTRACT WITH
DUTY WILL OF COURSE BE REQUIRED
BUT THERE'S ALSO OTHER TASKS
LIKE THE ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW
PROCESS.
STAFF HAVE BEEN ABLE TO MAKE
PROGRESS ON SOME OF THESE TASKS
WHILE IN REVIEW BUT OTHERS MUST
WAIT FOR AN EXECUTED CONTRACT.
MY STAFF RESPONSIBLE FOR
ADMINISTRATING THIS GRANT
THROUGH THEIR LOCAL AGENCY
PROGRAM HAVE ADVISED CITY STAFF
THAT THEIR PROJECTS SHOULD BE
OBLIGATED WELL IN ADVANCE
OF THE SEPTEMBER 30TH DEADLINE
IDEALLY BY MID AUGUST IN ORDER
TO BEAR THE OBLIGATION DEADLINE
TO BE SAFETYNET.
ANY POSTPONEMENT IN ORDER TO
MAKE FURTHER CHANGES TO THE
SCOPE WOULD VERY LIKELY PUSH US
BEYOND THE OBLIGATION DEADLINE
FOR THESE FUNDS QUESTION SIX TO
OFFER ANYTHING THAT WOULD LOWER
THE COST TO THE CITY BY USING
TWO DIFFERENT LINES RESPONSE,
AS PREVIOUSLY MENTIONED DID
AGREE TO LOWER INVENTORY
STOCKING REQUIREMENTS FOR
SPECIAL ORDER MATERIALS AS PART
OF THIS CONVERSATION A
CONVERSION PROJECT THE DIRECT
COST SAVINGS FROM MAINTAINING A
SMALLER INVENTORY WOULD APPLY
TO ANY SPECIAL ORDER MATERIALS
WHETHER THAT BE TO COVER A HEAD
STYLE PICTURES OR ONE
COVERED HEAD STYLE PICTURE
INDICATED THAT THEY WOULD BE
AMENABLE TO HELPING THE CITY
FIND A WAY TO REDUCE THE
UPFRONT COSTS FOR INITIAL
IMPLEMENTATION.
BUT THERE WAS NO INDICATION
THAT THAT WOULD REDUCE THE
STAFF'S EFFORT OR LONG TERM
COST FOR CO MANAGING THESE
STREETLIGHTS INCLUDING
INVENTORY MANAGEMENT.
QUESTION SEVEN THE MEMO
INDICATES THAT STAFF ASKED
ABOUT QUESTIONS IN THE MEMO BUT
IN THE COUNCIL DISCUSSION THERE
WAS A SPECIFIC REQUEST TO ASK
YOU TO E TO WORK WITH THE CITY
TO CREATE A PLAN THAT ALLOWS
FOR TWENTY NINE LIGHT BULBS TO
BE INSTALLED ON LOCAL STREETS
IN A MANNER THAT WOULD
SIGNIFICANTLY INCREASE COSTS
FOR THE CITY.
THIS MEMO DOES NOT DISCUSS IF
THAT REQUEST WAS MADE TO DETI
AND HOW OR WHAT ALTERNATIVE
SCENARIOS WERE CONSIDERED OR
FEEDBACK RECEIVED.
RESPONSE STAFF UNDERSTOOD THE
REQUEST FROM COUNCIL WAS TO
REENGAGE WITH DTI TO ASK IF
THEY WOULD REVISIT THE TERMS
OF THEIR SPECIAL ORDER
AGREEMENT AND SPECIFICALLY IF
THEY WOULD MANAGE THE INVENTORY
THEMSELVES.
WE PROVIDED THE FEEDBACK WE
RECEIVED ON THAT QUESTION IN A
MEMO STAFF DID NOT EXPLICITLY
BE ASKED TO HELP CREATE A PLAN
TO REDUCE THE CITY'S COSTS FOR
HAVING VARIOUS IDEAS ON LOCAL
AND MAJOR ROADS BECAUSE WE
DIDN'T UNDERSTAND THAT TO BE A
SPECIFIC REQUEST AND WE
APOLOGIZE IF WE MISUNDERSTOOD
COUNCIL'S INTENT WE DID DISCUSS
ALTERNATIVES WITH E THAT COULD
ALLOW THE CITY TO USE A SINGLE
PICTURE OF VARYING WATTAGES.
BUT ULTIMATELY THERE WAS NOT A
SINGLE FIXTURE THAT MET BOTH
THE TWENTY I WANT AND THE FIFTY
EIGHT WHAT CRITERIA THAT HAD
BEEN WIDELY DISCUSSED IN THE
COMMUNITY IN WHICH WE AND WHICH
WE HAD SORT OF LIKE FEEDBACK ON
DID HAS BEEN A WILLING PARTNER
IN THIS EFFORT AND HAS
INDICATED THAT THEY CAN ORDER
AND INSTALL EITHER OR BOTH
OF THE OVERHEAD FIXTURES TYPE
TYPES FOR THIS PROJECT
DEPENDING ON THE CITY'S FIXTURE
PREFERENCE FOLLOWING CITY
COUNCIL MEETING ON SEVEN
FIFTEEN CITY STAFF HAVE BEEN IN
NEAR DAILY CONTACT WITH VARIOUS
TECHNICAL STAFF AT DTG TO ASK
FURTHER QUESTIONS AND TALK
THROUGH VARIOUS ALTERNATIVES.
STAFF ALSO MET ON THURSDAY,
JULY 18TH AND ON THURSDAY,
AUGUST 1ST WITH A LARGER GROUP
FROM THAT INCLUDED THE
GOVERNMENT RELATIONS
REPRESENTED REPRESENTATIVES IN
ADDITION TO THE TECHNICAL TEAM,
STAFF WOULD LIKE TO REITERATE
THAT THE COST OF MANAGING THE
SPECIAL ORDER INVENTORY WITH
TWO PICTURES IS NOT THE
SINGULAR CONCERN AND
RECOMMENDING A SINGLE
COPPERHEAD STYLE FIXTURE FOR
THIS MERCIAN EFFORT.
AS WE HAVE LEARNED ABOUT MORE
ABOUT LIGHTING TECHNOLOGY AND
MORE ABOUT THE PICTURES THAT
WERE INSTALLED AS THE
DEMONSTRATION IN LIGHTS DO NOT
RECOMMEND THE TWYNAM WHITE
PICTURE FOR ANY ROADWAY
LIGHTING AT THIS TIME
REGARDLESS OF COST COMPARED
WITH THE MOST COMMON EXISTING
NOT LED LIGHT IN THE
NEIGHBORHOODS.
ONE HUNDRED WHAT THE TWENTY
NINE WATT LADY PICTURE WITH
HAZARD SHIELDING THAT WE
PILOTED IN THE FIELD ONLY
PROVIDES ABOUT A QUARTER OF THE
LEMONS THAT EXIST IN THE FIELD
TODAY.
STREETLIGHTS PROVIDE LIGHTING
IN OUR NEIGHBORHOODS BUT THEIR
PRIMARY PURPOSE IS TO
ILLUMINATE STREETS AND
SIDEWALKS IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT
OF WAY.
STAPLEY THE TWENTY NINE WATT
FIXTURE WITH THE HOUSE SIDE
SHIELDING TO REDUCE LIGHT
TRESPASS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY IS
TOO DRASTIC A REDUCTION IN
OVERALL LIGHTING FOR OUR ROADS
AND SIDEWALKS AND STAFF BELIEVE
IS INCONSISTENT WITH OUR
ROADWAY SAFETY GOALS FOR
VULNERABLE ROAD USERS LAID OUT
IN THE IS MOVING TOGETHER
TOWARDS VISION ZERO
TRANSPORTATION PLAN THE
RECOMMENDED THE RECOMMENDED
FIFTY EIGHT WHAT 2700 KELVIN
FIXTURE WITH HOWE SAID
SHIELDING MEETS BOTH OUR
ROADWAY LIGHTING NEEDS WHILE
ALSO TRYING TO MITIGATE
RESIDENT CONCERNS RELATED TO
COLOR TEMPERATURE WHITE
TRESPASS FLARE UP LIGHTING BACK
LIGHTING OVERALL BRIGHTNESS.
THANK YOU CHARLES DISCUSSION
PLEASE OF I SHOULD SAY THANK
YOU.
DISCUSSION PLEASE FOR DC ONE
COUNCIL MEMBER BRAKE'S LET ME
START BY SAYING THANK YOU SO
VERY VERY MUCH.
I KNOW THOSE ANSWERING THOSE
QUESTIONS WERE INCREDIBLY TIME
CONSUMING.
I KNOW THAT STAFF HAS BEEN
WORKING A GREAT DEAL ON THIS
SINCE OUR LAST MEETING AND OVER
THE LAST COUPLE OF YEARS AND SO
I APPRECIATE ALL OF THE WORK
THAT'S GONE IN, YOU KNOW,
ESPECIALLY IN THE LAST COUPLE
OF DAYS TO MAKE SURE THAT WE
GOT ALL OUR QUESTIONS ANSWERED.
AS YOU CAN HEAR FROM THE LAST
COUPLE OF PUBLIC COMMENT
PERIODS AND YOU WOULD SEE IF IF
LOOKING AT OUR EMAILS THEY IT
HAS BEEN FILLED WITH QUESTIONS
AROUND AROUND THIS ISSUE.
AND SO I THINK THAT THESE
RESPONSES DID A GOOD JOB
OF ANSWERING AND SUMMARIZING
ANSWERS TO ALL THE QUESTIONS,
MOST OF THE QUESTIONS THAT WE
HAVE RECEIVED.
>> I DID WANT TO FOLLOW UP ON
ONE THING THAT YOU MENTIONED
AND ASK YOU TO ELABORATE A
LITTLE BIT ON IT.
YOU MENTIONED TALKING WITH DTG
AND WITH NEGOTIATIONS AROUND
THE SINGLE FIXTURE WITH VARYING
WATTAGES.
COULD YOU ELABORATE A LITTLE
BIT ON THAT?
YES, SO IN OUR RESEARCH AS WE
WERE TALKING WITH DETI ABOUT
OPTIONS, WE DID LEARN THAT
THERE ARE IN THE NEWER VERSIONS
OF LEIDY'S FIXTURES SORT OF THE
NEWER GENERATIONS OF L.A.
FIXTURES THERE ARE THESE
ADJUSTABLE MODULES THAT CAN
SORT OF IT PROVIDES SOME
ADJUSTMENT OF THE WATTAGE FOR A
SPECIFIC FIXTURE AND IT SORT
OF DEPENDS ON THE SIZE OF THE
FIXTURE AND SORT OF INTENDED
USE AND THE AND SO WE WERE
LOOKING TO SEE IF THERE WAS A
FIXTURE THAT COULD DO BOTH
FIFTY AND TWENTY NINE WATT AND
WE THERE WAS NOT ONE THAT WE
EXPLORED THAT HAD THAT
CAPABILITY.
SO WE DID WE DID FIND THAT ON
THE DATA THAT WE HAVE
RECOMMENDED THAT THERE IS SOME
VARIATION ON THAT AND IT CAN GO
AS LOW AS FORTY EIGHT WATTS AND
IT CAN GO UP TO I THINK OVER
ONE HUNDRED WAS
TAXON OR
OBVIOUSLY WE'VE HEARD REALLY
STRONG CALLS FOR SORT OF FIFTY
EIGHT WATT AND TWENTY NINE.
WHAT YOU'VE EXPLAINED WHY
YOU'VE EXPLAINED WHY THAT'S NOT
RECOMMENDED.
>> I'M NOT GOING TO IN TERMS
OF A FIXTURE THAT WILL ALLOW
FOR AT LEAST A LOWER WATTAGE
OF FORTY WATTS DOES THAT SEEM
HOW WOULD THAT BE A VIABLE
ALTERNATIVE?
THE GOOD NEWS ABOUT THE FORTY
EIGHT WATT OR ARE SELECTING TO
INSTALL FORTY EIGHT WHY IS THAT
IT ISN'T IT IS THE EXISTING
FIXTURE SAID THE PURCHASE
AGREEMENT THAT IS IN FRONT
OF YOU IS THAT FIXTURE IT'S A
FIFTY WE SUSPECT IT OUT SCOPED
IT OUT AT FIFTY WATTS BUT IT
CAN BE REDUCED AS INSTALLATION.
IT'S NOT LIKE A DIAL I MEAN IT
WOULD BE INSTALLED AT FORTY
EIGHT WATTS AND SO THAT WOULD
BE SOMETHING THAT WE COULD DO
WITH THE EXISTING PURCHASE
AGREEMENT AND WITH THE EXISTING
LIGHTS THAT WE ALREADY WE'RE
ALREADY PREPARING TO ORDER OR
RECOMMENDING COUNCILMAN, THANK
YOU FOR PROVIDING ALL THAT
DETAILED INFORMATION.
IT'S GOT A LOT TO ABSORB OVER
THE LAST MONTH OR SO AND SO I
REALLY APPRECIATE YOUR WORK AND
BEING RESPONSIVE TO THE
QUESTIONS.
I GUESS I JUST WANTED TO KIND
OF SUMMARIZE A BIT OF WHAT I'VE
HEARD BOTH FROM THE COMMUNITY
AND, YOU KNOW, LEARNING FROM
STAFF JUST TO KIND OF SET THE
CONTEXT AS WE GO FORWARD.
SO YOU KNOW, WE KNOW FROM WHAT
WE'VE HEARD IN THESE CHAMBERS
ON EMAIL THAT OUR COMMUNITY
WANTS US TO BE A LEADER.
THEY CARE A LOT ABOUT OUR DARK
SKY ORDINANCE.
THEY CARE A LOT ABOUT HUMAN
HEALTH AND QUALITY OF LIFE.
ALL THE ENVIRONMENTAL CONCERNS
RELATED TO LIGHT.
THEY DON'T WANT ACCESS LATE
.
AND YOU KNOW, I THINK THAT
STAFF WORKING WITH THE DTI
AGAIN WHO OWNS THE
INFRASTRUCTURE WE HAVE TO
RECOGNIZE WHAT'S BEEN
ACCOMPLISHED.
SO WHILE I UNDERSTAND, YOU
KNOW, PEOPLE BRINGING UP THE
DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE TIME
WATT AND THE FIFTY EIGHT, I
HOPE I GOT THOSE NUMBERS RIGHT.
I KEEP MIXING UP YOU KNOW THE
DIFFERENCE IN ENERGY COST.
THIS IS YOU KNOW THIS GRANT IS
TO REDUCE OUR ENERGY FROM THE
CURRENT IN A VERY QUICKLY WAY
QUICK WAY BY TRANSFERRING TO
LSD WE HAVE THE IMPROVED
TEMPERATURE AND I GUESS THIS IS
THE POINT THAT I WANT TO HIT
OUR WHOLE IT FEELS LIKE OUR
WHOLE CHALLENGE BEHIND US.
YOU KNOW, THE CHALLENGES WITH
STAFF HAVING TO MANAGE SPECIAL
SPOTLIGHT IS BECAUSE DTG DOES
NOT STACK THIS LOWER
TEMPERATURE LIGHT BUT IT SEEMS
THAT THEY SHOULD BE STACKING IF
THIS WAS SOMETHING THAT THEY
STOCKED AND NOT A SPECIAL
ORDER.
I DON'T THINK WE WOULD BE
HAVING THIS DISCUSSION.
I THINK THIS WOULD BE MUCH
SIMPLER.
BUT THEY DON'T.
SO YOU KNOW, THE WHEN SO FAR
THAT WE HAVE IS THE TEMPERATURE
,THE FASTER TRANSITION, THE
SHIELDING, THE REDUCED
CARBON FOOTPRINT THOSE ARE ALL
GOOD.
YOU KNOW, I'M STILL OF THE MIND
THAT WE SHOULD BE DOING A LOWER
WATTAGE LIGHT LOCAL STREETS
THEY'RE LESS WIRED OR LESS
TRAFFICKED.
I THINK THERE'S ALL KINDS
OF REASONS WHY YOU DON'T NEED
THE SAME AMOUNT OF LIGHT AS YOU
DO ON ARTERIALS.
BUT I ALSO UNDERSTAND WHAT STAP
IS SAYING ABOUT THE COMPLEXITY
OF MANAGING.
SO I GUESS I WOULD LIKE TO HEAR
FROM SOME OF MY COLLEAGUES AS
WELL.
FURTHER DISCUSSION
BORODINO
THANK YOU AND I APPRECIATE MY
COUNCIL COLLEAGUES FOR FOR SOME
OF THEIR QUESTIONS AND
STATEMENTS AS WELL.
I TEND TO AGREE I'M IT MAKES
SENSE TO ME THAT THAT ALONE
WATTAGE LIGHT BUT WOULD BE
NECESSARY FOR OUR NEIGHBORHOOD
STREETS FOR THE REASONS COUNCIL
MEMBER ACKMANN POINTED OUT AND
AND FRANKLY JUST FOR QUALITY
OF LIFE IN GENERAL.
I MEAN IF WE SEE THESE AROUND
THE COMMUNITY, THEY'RE
SIGNIFICANTLY BRIGHTER THAN THE
NECESSARY IN IN THE
NEIGHBORHOOD.
>> AND I WILL ALSO EXPRESS I
THINK A LITTLE BIT
OF FRUSTRATION.
I KNOW THAT COUNCIL MEMBER
BRIGS AND I HAD THE OPPORTUNITY
TO HAVE A CONVERSATION WITH A
REPRESENTATIVE FROM D.C.
EARLIER THIS WEEK WHERE COUNCIL
MEMBER BREAKS SHARE ON YOUR
BEHALF AGAINST WAS ADVOCATING
QUITE STRONGLY FOR THE BEFORE
TO MAKE A SHIFT IN TERMS
OF WHAT THEIR STANDARDS ARE.
YOU KNOW, WE'RE A COMMUNITY
THAT'S HAVING THIS CONVERSATION
ABOUT WHETHER OR NOT WE WANT TO
BEAR THE COST AND THE BURDEN
OF MAKING THIS TRANSITION
FRANKLY BECAUSE THIS IS AN AREA
WHERE IT SHOULD HAVE MADE THIS
TRANSITION ALREADY AND SHOULD
BE SETTING A STANDARD ACROSS
THEIR SERVICE AREA AND HAS AN
AND SO I THINK THAT'S SOMETHING
THAT WE NEED TO CONTINUE TO
PUSH FOR.
I THINK I HOPE IT'S A LESSON
THAT THEY'RE LEARNING FROM THIS
PROCESS.
AND AND I WILL ALSO SAY AND
I'VE SHARED US WITH A FEW
OF YOU BEFORE YOU KNOW I AM THE
MORE AND MORE THAT THE CITY IS
RESPONSIBLE FOR DOING DTRS JOB
,IT LEADS ME TO QUESTION
WHETHER WHY WE'RE KEEPING DETI
AROUND.
AND SO SO THIS IS AN ONGOING
QUESTION IN OUR COMMUNITY.
IT'S ONE THAT HAS PROVIDED ME A
LEVEL OF FRUSTRATION AND I KNOW
OUR RESIDENTS AND CONSTITUENTS
THE LEVEL OF FRUSTRATION OVER
THE LAST SEVERAL WEEKS.
>> I'M GRATEFUL TO HEAR THAT
THERE'S POTENTIALLY AN
ALTERNATIVE THAT WOULD PROVIDE
AT LEAST SLIGHTLY SLIGHTLY LESS
WHAT A SLIGHT LESS WATTAGE IN
OUR NEIGHBORHOODS.
I WOULD PERHAPS BE INTERESTED
IN HEARING IF THIS IS SOMETHING
AVAILABLE TO STAFF.
I KNOW WE'RE TALKING ABOUT THE
AMOUNT OF ELECTRICITY BEING
USED IN THE WATTAGE.
DO WE BELIEVE THAT KIND OF A
FORTY EIGHT WATT ALTERNATIVE
WOULD PROVIDE SIGNIFICANTLY
LESS BRIGHTNESS KIND OF IN THAT
AREA THAT MIGHT HELP TO ADDRESS
SOME OF THESE CONCERNS?
I HAVE SOME INFORMATION FOR IF
WE WERE FOR THAT THE FIFTY
EIGHT WATT FIXTURE TURNED DOWN
TO THE LOWER SETTING OF FORTY
EIGHT WATT AT THE TWENTY SEVEN
HUNDRED KELVIN COLOR
TEMPERATURE THE LUMINAIRES
VALUE OF THAT WOULD BE AROUND
6000 WHICH IS A TWENTY PERCENT
DECREASE FROM THE EXISTING
LUMINAIRES AND BASED ON LIKE
ONE HUNDRED WEIGHTLIFT
CURRENTLY OUT THERE WITH THE
SHIELDING WITH THE ADDITIONAL
SHIELDING THAT WOULD DROP DOWN
TO AROUND FORTY NINE WATTS
WHICH WOULD BE A TOTAL OF LIKE
A THIRTY FOUR PERCENT DECREASE.
SO I WOULD SAY YOU KNOW A NOT
INSIGNIFICANT DECREASE IN THE
AMOUNT OF OVERALL LIGHT BUT
CERTAINLY NOT AS DRASTIC AS
LIKE A SEVENTY TWO PERCENT
REDUCTION WHICH IS WHAT WE SAW
WITH THE TWENTY NINE WHAT WAS
SHIELDING YOUR SECOND OR
PERHAPS FURTHER DISCUSSION
LET'S GO DEERSKIN THE BUNDAMBA
I'VE I JUST WANTED TO EXPRESS A
LOT OF GRATITUDE TO STAFF FOR
FIRST OF ALL THE WORK THAT WAS
DONE TO SECURE THIS GRANT IN
THE FIRST PLACE AND THEN THE
CONSIDERABLE ENERGY THAT YOU'VE
ALL PUT INTO NEGOTIATING OR
WORKING WITH YOU MIGHT BE A
BETTER WAY OF PUTTING THAT TO
MAKE SURE THAT THIS SUITS AS
MANY OF OUR COMMUNITY NEEDS AS
POSSIBLE.
I'M ALSO REALLY GRATEFUL FOR MY
COLLEAGUES FOR HOW MUCH ENERGY
YOU'VE PUT IN TO REALLY HEARING
OUR RESIDENTS CONCERNS ABOUT
EXCESSIVE LIGHTING AND FOR
UNDERSTANDING AS MUCH AS
POSSIBLE ABOUT THIS HIGHLY
TECHNICAL ISSUE WHICH AS
EVIDENCED BY THE PREVIOUS
ANSWER IS REALLY DIFFICULT TO
GET ALL OF OUR HEADS AROUND.
AND SO THIS IS AN AREA FOR ME
WHERE I FEEL A REAL NEED TO TO
LEAN ON STAFF.
I DON'T MEAN IN THE SENSE
OF PRESSURE.
I MEAN THIS IS WHERE STAFF
SUPPORT IS CRUCIAL AND IT'S
WHERE I THINK DILIGENT AND
THOUGHTFUL BACK AND FORTH IN
QUESTIONING BETWEEN CMS AND
STAFF IS REALLY IMPORTANT.
SO I'M SO GRATEFUL THAT ALL
OF THAT WAS DONE.
I FEEL VERY RELIEVED THAT THE
FIXTURE THAT YOU HAVE ALL THAT
STAFF HAS BACKED OUT ENABLES
SOME FLEXIBILITY CLEARLY THERE
NEED TO BE DECISIONS ABOUT HOW
IT GETS SET AT THE MOMENT
OF INSTALLING BECAUSE IT'S NOT
LIKE YOU CLIMB UP THE POLE AND
TURN IT DOWN.
SO I HOPE THAT THAT WILL NOT BE
AN OVERLY BURDENSOME TASK.
BUT I'M FEELING EXTREMELY
REASSURED THAT WE FOUND
SOMETHING THAT MEETS OUR NEEDS
FOR SAFETY AND MEETS OUR NEEDS
FOR TO PRESERVE DARK SKIES AND
EVERYONE'S SLEEPING PATTERNS
HUMAN AND NOT HUMAN ALIKE.
SO I AM GOING TO VOTE FOR THIS
AND I'M VERY GRATEFUL AGAIN FOR
ALL THE WORK THAT'S GONE INTO
THIS.
I MYSELF ALSO INDICATE THAT MY
CLOCK STARTED THAT I'M GOING TO
ULTIMATELY I BELIEVE SUPPORT
THE RESOLUTION.
I'D LIKE TO ALSO FRAME ONE
POINT WHICH IS CRUCIAL FOR ME
AND THAT IS THAT WE ARE NOT
OPERATING HERE IN A VACUUM.
WE'RE OPERATING IN AS A FOIL
AGAINST DTES EXISTING
CONVERSION PLAN DTD EXISTING
CONVERSION PLAN WILL BRING
LIGHTS LED LIGHTS TO THE
COMMUNITY THAT ARE MATERIALLY
BRIGHTER AND A DIFFERENT COLOR
TEMPERATURE AND A LESS
MATERIALLY LESS ATTRACTIVE
COLOR TEMPERATURE THAN IS
CONTEMPLATED TONIGHT.
SO JUXTAPOSED TO THAT EVENTUAL
REALITY LAYERED WITH THE
UPFRONT COST SAVINGS OF THE
MILLION GRAM PLUS THE RAPID
ACHIEVEMENT OF AN IMPORTANT
EIGHT TO ZERO GOAL WITH THE
SUGAR OF THE DIAL DOWN TO FORTY
EIGHT WHICH IS A PLEASURE TO
LEARN IN MY VIEW THIS BUSINESS
MEETS OUR GOAL FOR ME
PERSONALLY I HATE STREETLIGHTS.
YOU KNOW I'D MUCH RATHER YOU
KNOW I THAT'S THAT'S WHERE I AM
AS YOU KNOW AS AS CHRISTOPHER
BUT AS MAYOR, YOU KNOW I THINK
IT'S THE IT'S THE RIGHT AND
NECESSARY THING TO DO BOTH FROM
A BUDGETARY PERSPECTIVE FROM A
BALANCING PERSPECTIVE AGAINST
THE THE ONCOMING REALITY
OF DETAINEES.
>> WORSE BULB'S LEAVENED WITH
STAFFS TRANSPORTATION ENGINEERS
RECOMMENDATION ABOUT WHAT IS
NECESSARY FOR FOR IN STREET
PEDESTRIAN AND VEHICULAR AND I
ASSUME BICYCLE TO SAFETY THESE
THINGS ALL BUNDLED TOGETHER
LEAD ME TO SAY THAT THIS IS A
WELL IT'S AN OUTSTANDING
SOLUTION IN MANY RESPECTS FROM
STAFF AND SO I DO WANT TO GIVE
GIVE STAFF GREAT LOVE FOR THAT
FROM A FROM NEIGHBORHOOD
PERSPECTIVE IT IS A IT IS A OK
SOLUTION.
IT IS BETTER THAN IT WILL BE IN
THE ABSENCE OF THE SOLUTION.
SO I WILL CHOOSE THE THE PRETTY
GOOD AS AND FORESTALL THE
ARRIVAL OF THE NOT VERY GOOD
THE COUNCIL MEMBER BRIGGS AND
BRIGGS ARE DENHA WATSON THANKS
.
I DON'T WANT TO RESTATE THAT
THAT THE POINTS THAT YOU MADE
MAYOR AND I WILL ADD THAT I
SPOKE WITH THE EXECUTIVE
DIRECTOR
OF SOME COG TODAY TO
UNDERSTAND SORT OF WHAT MIGHT
JEOPARDIZE OUR OUR GRANT AND
WHAT MIGHT JEOPARDIZE OUR
ABILITY TO RECEIVE GRANTS IN
THE FUTURE AS WELL.
AND IT IS IMPORTANT THAT THAT
WE DO THAT WERE THAT WE REACH A
POINT OF AGREEMENT THIS EVENING
ON THIS.
AND SO, YOU KNOW, I WANT TO
REITERATE, YOU KNOW, HOW
IMPORTANT I THINK RECEIVING
THIS GRANT IS FOR THE CITY AND
ACHIEVING ALL OF THE GOALS THAT
HAVE BEEN STATED BY MY
COLLEAGUES.
I THINK THE ABILITY TO GET A 34
PERCENT REDUCTION IN BRIGHTNESS
IN OUR ON OUR LOCAL STREETS BY
REDUCING THE WATTAGE TO FORTY
EIGHT WATTS ON OUR LOCAL
STREETS WOULD BE A REAL GAIN
AND ALSO MEET AT LEAST BEGIN TO
MEET THE CALL THAT WE HAVE HAD
FOR FOR LOWER LIGHTING ON LOCAL
STREETS THAN ON ARTERIALS.
AND SO I'D LIKE TO RECOMMEND A
PROPOSE AN AMENDMENT WHICH I'M
HAPPY TO HAVE DIFFERENT WORDING
STATED SINCE THIS IS NOT
WRITTEN DOWN BUT RESOLVED THAT
THE FIXTURES SHALL BE INSTALLED
WITH FORTY EIGHT LIGHT BULBS ON
LOCAL STREETS AND FIFTY EIGHT
FLOORS ELSEWHERE I I WENT TO I
WILL START THERE WITH A SECOND
JUST TO GET THAT PARTY STARTED
I AM IN THEIR SECOND UP 58 TO
YOU.
I AM INFORMED THAT THAT THIS
WILL BE THAT IF WE PASS THIS
THIS EVENING THEN THE
PARTICULARS OF WHAT THAT WHAT
WHAT AND HOW THAT GETS DONE
WILL BE COMING TO US AT SOME
POINT WE UNDERSTAND THE
INTEREST OF SEEMINGLY WHERE
THIS IS GOING AND WE'RE ABLE TO
EXECUTE THAT WITHOUT ANY KIND
OF AMENDMENT OR ANYTHING ELSE.
WELL, WE'LL TAKE IT FROM THERE
.
AH MAY I CHARACTERIZE IT AS
WITHDRAWN THAT THEY AREN'T
HAPPY WITH THAT EVERYBODY'S
HAPPY.
ALL RIGHT.
YOU STILL I DON'T KNOW IF YOU
STILL ON THE FLOOR YOU'RE GOOD
WITH DENHA PART OF MY QUESTION
WAS ANSWERED I WAS GOING TO ASK
WHAT ELSE WAS NEEDED FOR US TO
GET TO THAT POINT.
THIS IS A TECHNICAL QUESTION
FOR MISS STEWART AND I DON'T
KNOW THAT IT IS NECESSARILY ONE
FOR YOU VERSUS VERSUS DTT THE
SHIELD IN PARTICULAR.
I'VE HEARD SOME CONCERN THAT
THEY'RE NOT THEY DON'T FULLY
ENVELOP THE THE LIGHT AND AIMED
DOWNWARD AND SO WHEN THEY ARE
PLACED ON A LIGHT THEY ACTUALLY
COULD HAVE THE THE EFFECT
OF REFLECTING THE LIGHT INTO A
HOUSE ACROSS THE STREET, FOR
EXAMPLE IS IS THERE REALLY ONLY
ONE SHIELD OPTION HERE?
I GUESS I I'VE HEARD A LOT
ABOUT SHIELDS AS A POTENTIAL
ALTERNATIVE TO HELP CONTROL THE
LIGHT BUT I COULD SEE IT AS
KIND OF LIKE A SITUATION WHERE
WE'RE CREATING DUELING
NEIGHBORS WHO ARE REFLECTING
BACK AND FORTH AT EACH OTHER SO
SO WHAT WHAT IS THE SOLUTION
THERE?
IS IT IS IT POTENTIALLY THAT IT
JUST WASN'T PROPERLY APPLIED IN
THOSE SITUATIONS?
>> YEAH, I CAN TAKE AN EFFORT
AT RESPONDING TO THAT MAYBE
WITHOUT TOO MUCH TECHNICALITY
WHICH IS THAT THEY'RE IN OUR
DISCUSSIONS WITH DETI AND
UNDERSTANDING MORE ABOUT THE
SPECIFIC MANUFACTURER'S OPTIONS
FOR SHIELDING FOR THE FIXTURES
THAT WE'VE BEEN LOOKING AT.
THEY ARE THESE SNAPPIN SHIELDS
WHICH ARE DIFFERENT THAN SORT
OF THE OLD STYLE LIKE METAL
PLATE THAT MIGHT BE WRAPPED
AROUND IN LIGHT.
SO IT SORT OF REALLY LIKE
ALMOST FLUSH WITH THE PICTURE
ITSELF AND MOST OF THE
COMPLAINTS THAT THE CITY HAS
RECEIVED AROUND STREETLIGHTS
AND BASED ON WHAT WE UNDERSTAND
FROM DUTY AS WELL, MOST OF THE
COMPLAINTS THAT THEY RECEIVED
IS ABOUT BACKLIGHTING BEHIND
THE HYAM THE LIGHT SORT OF ON
THE HOUSE SIDE BECAUSE THAT IS
WHERE THE LIGHT TRESPASS IS
MOST LIKELY TO GO.
SO THAT'S WHY WE'RE THAT'S WHY
WE CAME TO THE AGREEMENT WITH
DUTY TO INSTALL THE HOUSE SIDE
SHIELDS NO MATTER WHAT.
AS PART OF THIS THERE ARE
INSTANCES WHERE THERE ARE THERE
IS SOME LIKE TRESPASS DEPENDING
ON THE WIDTH OF THE ROAD AND
DIFFERENT SORT
OF CONFIGURATIONS IN THE FIELD
WHERE THERE MIGHT BE LESS
TRESPASS FROM THE FRONT AS WELL
.
AND THERE'S A COUPLE OF THINGS
THAT WE HAVE TO CONSIDER WHEN
WE DO THAT.
THEY DO HAVE FRONT SHIELDS AS A
SEPARATE OPTION BUT THAT DOES
SORT OF LIMIT DEPENDING ON THE
SIZE OF THE ROAD, THE ROADWAY
OR THE RIGHT OF WAY THERE COULD
ALSO REDUCE THE AMOUNT OF LIGHT
ON THE ROAD.
AND SO HE HAS INDICATED THAT IF
THAT WAS A REQUEST THAT CAME
FROM A RESIDENT SPECIFICALLY
FOR FRONT SHIELDING, THEY WOULD
ENGAGE WITH A CITY TO TO MAKE
SURE THAT WE WERE COMFORTABLE
WITH THE AMOUNT OF LIKE REDUCED
LIGHTING ON THE ROADS.
BUT THAT WOULD BE SORT
OF HANDLED ON A CASE BY CASE
BASIS.
SO THE HOUSE SHIELD IS THE ONE
THAT WE FEEL MOST STRONGLY
ABOUT BUT THERE ARE OTHER
OPTIONS SHOULD THERE INDIVIDUAL
ISSUES BASED ON SORT
OF SPECIFIC NEEDS?
THANK YOU.
AND HOW HOW WOULD A RESIDENT GO
ABOUT REQUESTING THAT IN A CASE
BY CASE BASIS?
>> YEAH, I WELL WE WILL WE WILL
COME UP WITH A STRATEGY TO TO
MAKE SURE THAT AS PART OF THIS
WE WILL I'M CERTAIN THERE WILL
BE COMMUNICATIONS ABOUT THE
CONVERSION PROJECT, WHAT'S IN
IT AS THAT PROCESS ROLLS OUT
AND WE WILL BE SURE TO ENGAGE
WITH DTI TO MAKE SURE WE HAVE A
CLEAR DIRECTION FOR US.
THAT'S WHO HAVE CONCERNS ABOUT
WHY TRESPASS BEYOND THE HOUSE
AND SHIELDING SO THAT WE WILL
ENSURE THAT IS INCLUDED IN OUR
COMMUNICATIONS COUNCIL MEMBER
WATSON.
HEY, YOU KNOW I APPRECIATE THE
QUESTIONS COMING FROM THE
COMMUNITY.
THE MEMBERS OF COMMUNITY HAVE
COME HERE IN PERSON ALSO ALL
THE WORK DONE BY STAFF.
>> THE QUESTION THAT I SAW
COMING THROUGH OR THAT I'VE
HEARD COME THROUGHOUT THIS
DISCUSSION IS YOU KNOW,
SOMETHING ALONG THE LINES
OF HOW EXPENSIVE CAN IT BE TO
HAVE THESE TWO DIFFERENT TYPES
OF BULBS ADMINISTER THE SYSTEM.
AND I I LOOK TO I DID IT SOME
INTERNET SEARCHING ON THIS IN
GRAND RAPIDS ACTUALLY STUDIED
THIS ISSUE IN 2019 AND THEY
CAME TO THE SAME CONCLUSION AND
THEY CONFIRMED HAVING TWO TYPES
OF BULBS WOULD BE TOO COSTLY
FROM AN ADMINISTRATIVE
STANDPOINT.
THEY SAID IT WOULD COST 75000
DOLLARS MORE IN 2003 AND THAT'S
YOU KNOW, INFLATE THAT UP, YOU
KNOW, FOR THE PAST FIVE YEARS.
BUT ALSO, YOU KNOW, THEY DIDN'T
EVEN FACTOR IN THE COST OF THAT
TO YOU JUST THAT WAS JUST SOME
KIND OF STORAGE OF DIFFERENT
THINGS.
>> SO ALSO WHEN GRAND RAPIDS
DID THIS STUDY, THEY THEY
WANTED TO GIVE THEIR COMMUNITY
THE OPPORTUNITY TO TEST THE
DIFFERENT WALKS OF LIFE BUT
THEY ONLY TESTED BULBS 118
WATTS.
>> SO THAT'S DOUBLE THE OPTION
THAT STAFF IS GIVING US.
>> SO WE'RE LOOKING AT FIFTY
EIGHT WATTS BUT THEY ONLY GAVE
PEOPLE THE OPTION OF 118 WATTS
AND THEY ENDED UP EVEN AFTER A
COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT THEY CHOSE
A FOUR THOUSAND KELVIN
COOLNESS.
>> WELL YOU KNOW WE'RE GOING
WITH 2700 SO STAFF GAVE THE
COMMUNITY A BROADER SET
OF OPTIONS TO GIVE FEEDBACK ON.
WE'RE COMING WITH SOMETHING
THAT'S APPROXIMATELY HALF THE
COOLNESS AND HALF THE HALF THE
WATTAGE THAT GRAND RAPIDS ENDED
UP CHOOSING SO YOU KNOW, I KNOW
THIS ISN'T PERFECT FROM A DARK
SKY STANDPOINT, BUT I THINK
WHEN YOU PUT IT IN THE CONTEXT
OF WHAT OTHER CITIES IN
MICHIGAN HAVE BEEN DOING, I DO
THINK THAT THIS WAS, YOU KNOW,
PROGRESSIVE DECISION BY STAFF
IN TERMS OF THE FEEDBACK THEY
WERE ASKING FOR.
>> AND YOU KNOW, I AGREE WITH
THE FACT THAT, YOU KNOW, AT THE
TO THE DAY WE EITHER ACCEPT
THIS AGREEMENT OR DTV
EVENTUALLY CONVERTS THESE
LIGHTS TO COOLER AND BRIGHTER
OPTIONS FOR DISCUSSION.
>> SO THAT'S INTERESTING.
JUST A QUICK THANKS TO COUNCIL
MEMBER BASE FOR ASKING THAT
QUESTION OF WHAT WOULD PUT US
AT RISK FOR ASKING FOR FOR
QUALIFYING FOR FUTURE GRANTS
THAT'S COME UP TO COUNCIL
BEFORE WHERE WE DECLINED
PARTICIPATING IN STATE FUNDING
FOR A SIDEWALK NEAR A PUBLIC
SCHOOL.
AND IT'S BEEN A WHILE SINCE I
THINK WE'VE BEEN ABLE TO PURSUE
ADDITIONAL FUNDING NOT JUST WE
AS THE CITY BUT ALSO IN OUR
PUBLIC SCHOOLS.
SO THESE DECISIONS ARE MADE AT
THE TABLE AND THE CONVERSATIONS
THAT WE HAVE DO HAVE
REPERCUSSIONS IN FUTURE WORK.
>> SO I REALLY APPRECIATE THAT
THAT YOU ANTICIPATED THAT THOSE
FUTURE CONSEQUENCES, THE
DISCUSSION WILL ALTHOUGH PLEASE
STARTING WITH COUNCIL MEMBER
WATSON
COUNCIL MEMBER WATSON.
YES, WE'RE DENHA YES TO OUTSIDE
ONE YES.
>> MAYOR TAYLOR YES.
CUSTOMER IRE YES.
CUSTOMER YES.
COUNCILOR BRIGGS YES.
CUSTOMER CORNELL ABSENT
HOUSEWARE ISH YES.
ELSEWHERE HARRISON YES.
COUNCIL SONG YES MOTION CARRIES
DC TO RESOLUTION DIRECTING THE
CITY ADMINISTRATOR TO NEGOTIATE
THE TRANSFER OF ALL STATE OWNED
TRUNK LINES WITHIN THE CITY.
THEN ARBER TO THE CITY THEN
ARBER MOVI COUNCIL MEMBER BRIGG
SECONDED BY COUNCIL MEMBER AIA
DISCUSSION PLEASE OF DC TO
COUNCIL MEMBER BRAKE'S THANKS I
FEEL LIKE I'M TALKING A LOT
THIS EVENING BUT START ON YOU
KNOW SHORTLY AFTER OUR WORK
SESSION IN JUNE WHERE WE
RECEIVED THE PRESENTATION ON
THE TRUNK LINE STUDY IS DONE
JUNE 21ST.
FORTY FIVE YEAR OLD YPSILANTI
RESIDENT WAS CRITICALLY INJURED
RIDING HIS BIKE ON WASHINGTON
HERE ON PARKWAY THESE ARE THE
THE REAL OUTCOMES OF OF HAVING
STREETS DANGEROUSLY DESIGNED
STREETS AND YET PEOPLE CHOOSE
TO BIKE FOR ALL TYPES
OF REASONS.
IT'S MORE AFFORDABLE.
IT'S GOOD FOR OUR HEALTH.
IT'S GOOD FOR THE ENVIRONMENT.
>> BUT IN SOME PLACES OF OUR
COMMUNITY SIGNIFICANTLY MORE
DANGEROUS.
WASHINGTON AVENUE IS ONE
OF THOSE CORRIDORS THAT WE KNOW
TO BE DANGEROUS.
IT IS LISTED AS A TIER ONE
CORRIDOR IN OUR VISION ZERO
FOCUSED TRANSPORTATION PLAN AND
FOUR OF THE MOST DANGEROUS
INTERSECTIONS IN THE CITY ARE
ON WASHTENAW ALTHOUGH THEY
COMPRISE JUST A HANDFUL OF THE
CITY'S ROADWAYS, 77 PERCENT
OF CRASHES OCCUR ON TIER ONE
AND TIER TWO CORRIDORS AND ALL
OF THE TRUNK LINES ARE LISTED
AS EITHER A TIER ONE OR TIER
TWO CORRIDOR IN OUR PLAN THE
FIRST STRATEGY LISTED IN THE
TRANSPORTATION PLAN IS TO FOCUS
IS TO FOCUS TRANSPORTATION
INVESTMENTS ON OUR CORRIDORS
AND IN INTERSECTIONS WITH THE
MOST SERIOUS CRASHES.
SO THAT'S WHY IN STRONG SUPPORT
OF BEGINNING NEGOTIATIONS WITH
MTA TO ASSUME LOCAL CONTROL
OF THESE ROADWAYS BUT BEYOND
SAFETY WASHTENAW HERE IN
JACKSON AND MAIN STREET ARE
IMPORTANT TO OUR COMMUNITY FOR
A WHOLE HOST OF REASONS.
IF YOU DREW A VENN DIAGRAM IT
WOULD BE CLEAR THAT ADVANCING
OUR WALKABILITY LIKABILITY AND
TRANSIT GOALS ARE CENTRAL TO
MANY OF OUR TOP PRIORITIES
ACHIEVING CLIMATE NEUTRALITY,
EQUITY, COMMUNITY
AFFORDABILITY, PLACE MAKING,
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND JUST
BEING A NICE PLACE TO LIVE SO
THAT'S WHY WE'VE PRIORITIZED
THESE MOBILITY OPTIONS AND SO
MANY OF OUR PLANS.
UNFORTUNATELY WE KNOW FROM
EXPERIENCE THAT HASN'T BEEN
WILLING TO ACTIVELY PARTNER
WITH US TO FIX THESE DANGEROUS
ROADS.
>> SO IT'S TIME TO DO WHAT
OTHER COMMUNITIES LIKE
KALAMAZOO AND GRAND RAPIDS HAVE
DONE BEFORE US AND TAKE CONTROL
OF THESE IMPORTANT CORRIDORS.
EARLIER IN THE NIGHT WE TALKED
ABOUT DAQUAN AND BEING SO
EXCITED ABOUT SEEING WHAT'S
HAPPENING IN WASHTENAW THAT'S
THAT'S TRUE IN OTHER QUARTERS
THE REALITY IS OUR LANDRU
SCHOOLS ARE ARE INTERCONNECTED
WITH OUR TRANSPORTATION GOALS
AND WE NEED THESE YOU KNOW, WE
NEED WASHTENAW TO FOCUS TO BE A
TRANSIT CORRIDOR.
WE NEED NORTH MAIN STREET TO BE
A SAFE PLACE TO WALK AND BIKE.
IT IS A KEY CONNECTOR TO THE
BORDER TO BORDER TRAIL.
WE NEED JACKSON AND HURON TO BE
SAFE STREETS FOR PEOPLE TO BE
ABLE TO CROSS AND BIKE PYCON WE
NEED ALL OF OUR STREETS TO BE
LIKE THIS BUT UNFORTUNATELY WE
HAVEN'T HAD THE CONTROL OVER
THEM SO I'M EXCITED TO BE
SUPPORTING THIS THIS EVENING
AND I HOPE THAT OTHERS WILL AS
WELL.
>> COUNCILOR REDISH.
THANK YOU MAYOR.
THANK YOU.
COUNCIL MEMBER BRIGG'S.
SINCE I MOVED HERE SOME YEARS
AGO I HAVE FANTASIZED ABOUT
WHAT NORTHMEN COULD BECOME IF
IT WERE NOT A FOUR LANE NEAR
HIGHWAY BECAUSE OF COURSE IT IS
40 45 MILES AN HOUR BUT NOBODY
FOLLOWS THAT SPEED LIMIT AND IT
IS DIFFICULT FOR BUSINESSES TO
SUSTAIN THEMSELVES ON THAT
CORRIDOR BECAUSE IT IS NOT A
PLEASANT CORRIDOR TO BE A
PEDESTRIAN AND IT IS A
TERRIFYING ROAD ON WHICH TO BE
A BICYCLIST.
SO I AM THRILLED TO SEE THIS
RESOLUTION.
I'M VERY GRATEFUL TO MY
COLLEAGUES FOR BRINGING IT
FORWARD AND I WOULD LIKE TO BE
ADDED AS A CO-SPONSOR.
>> THANK YOU.
COUNCIL MEMBER GARCELON.
I THANK YOU MAYOR AND I ALSO
WANT TO JUST THANK COUNCIL
MEMBER BRIGG'S NACHMAN AND
HARRISON FOR ALL WORKING ON
THIS AND COLLABORATING TOGETHER
ON IT.
YOU KNOW, I JUST WANTED TO SAY
A FEW WORDS ABOUT HOW THIS IS
REALLY AS COUNCIL MEMBER
OF BRICK STATED ABOUT IMPROVING
THE SAFETY AND ACCESSIBILITY
AND MOBILITY OF SOME OF OUR
MOST DANGEROUS STREETS IN OUR
CITY.
I ALSO THINK IT'S IMPORTANT TO
SAY THAT BY ENGAGING IN THIS
NEGOTIATION PROCESS IT'S NOT
NECESSARILY A WAY TO LET THE
STATE OFF THE HOOK.
I PERSONALLY HOPE THAT IN THIS
PROCESS WE CAN ALSO ADVOCATE
THAT THE STATE BOTH ADEQUATELY
ENGAGE WITH COMMUNITIES FROM
THE GET GO AND MAINTAIN THE
SAFETY OF TRUNK LINES WHICH IS
IN ALIGNMENT WITH THE STATE'S
OWN TRANSPORTATION SAFETY AND
EQUITY GOALS.
AND I ALSO HOPE THAT, YOU KNOW,
IN CITIES SUCH AS OURS WHERE
THE SAFETY AND MAINTENANCE HAS
LAPSED THAT THE STATE WILL HELP
TO COMPENSATE CITIES THAT ARE
FORCED TO TRANSFER TRUNK LINES
AND MAKE THEIR OWN IMPROVEMENTS
BECAUSE WE SHOULD ALSO
ACKNOWLEDGE THAT NOT ALL CITIES
HAVE THE LUXURY OF BEING ABLE
TO EVEN ENGAGE THE DAY A
TRANSFER OF TRUNK LINES AND
IMPROVING SAFETY SHOULD NOT BE
A PRIVILEGE.
>> SO I'M EXCITED TO SUPPORT US
TONIGHT AND I ALSO THINK IT'S
IMPORTANT THAT WE CONTINUE TO
PRESSURE THE STATE AND
ENCOURAGE THE STATE TO MEET THE
GOALS OF OF KEEPING TRUNK LINES
SAFE FOR ALL CITIES.
>> THANK YOU, COUNCILOR
RACKMAN.
THANK YOU.
>> ECHOING WHAT COUNCIL MEMBER
GARTSIDE ONCE SAID, YOU KNOW, I
DON'T RELISH TAKING ON
ADDITIONAL INFRASTRUCTURE.
>> I WOULD LIKE THAT TO FOLLOW
THROUGH ON THEIR OWN VALY
STATED VALUES OF MAKING THE
ROADS SAFE FOR EVERYBODY.
BUT THEY'RE NOT AND THOSE
CHALLENGES HAVE BEEN NOTED.
YOU BOTH AT THIS TABLE AND BY
PUBLIC COMMENTERS PEOPLE LIVE
ON THESE STREETS.
WE WANT MORE PEOPLE TO LIVE ON
THESE STREETS AND UNFORTUNATELY
PEOPLE ARE GETTING SERIOUSLY
INJURED ON THESE STREETS.
YOU KNOW, WE HAVE A STATEWIDE
PROBLEM WITH CRASHES INVOLVING
VULNERABLE USERS BELIEVE OVER
THE TWENTY TWENTY THREE CRASHES
AND FATALITIES.
WE'RE DOWN TWO PERCENT IN THE
STATE OVERALL BUT CRASHES
INVOLVING VULNERABLE ROAD USERS
LIKE PEDESTRIANS AND BICYCLISTS
INCREASED BY AT LEAST 10
PERCENT.
SO YOU KNOW, WE HAVE A
STATEWIDE PROBLEM THAT WE NEED
TO ADDRESS AND ALL OF OUR
ROADWAYS I THINK I LOOK FORWARD
TO THIS BEING THE FIRST STEP TO
MAKING THESE ROADS MORE
WELCOMING FOR EVERYBODY WHO
LIVES PLEASE AND RECREATES
AROUND THEM.
>> CAN'T REMEMBER DENHA.
THANK YOU, MAYOR AND THANK YOU
TO THE SPONSORS FOR BRINGING
THIS FORWARD.
I DON'T WANT TO RESTATE THINGS
THAT WERE SAID BEFORE SO ECHO
MY APPRECIATION FOR US TO BE
ABLE TO START THIS CONVERSATION
ACKNOWLEDGING THAT THIS IS
LIKELY GOING TO BE A LONG
CONVERSATION THIS ANOTHER ONE
OF THOSE THINGS THAT IS NOT
GOING TO BE A PROBLEM THAT
SOLVED OVERNIGHT.
IT'S GOING TO INVOLVE A LOT
OF CONVERSATION WITH THE STATE
IN THAT REGARD AND I APOLOGIZE
TO THE SPONSORS FOR NOT GIVING
YOU THE HEADS UP.
I DID HAVE A COUPLE
OF CONVERSATIONS TODAY WITH
SOME OF OUR STATE FOLKS WHO WHO
ARE INTERESTED IN THIS TOPIC
AND DIDN'T NECESSARILY KNOW WE
WERE MOVING FORWARD WITH IT
YET.
BUT GIVEN THEIR THEIR ROLES AT
THE STATE LEVEL WANTED TO MAKE
SURE THAT AS WE WERE HAVING
THIS WE WERE ENGAGING THEM AS
POTENTIAL PARTNERS AND
COLLABORATORS IN THIS WORK.
I KNOW THAT STATE
REPRESENTATIVE MORGAN IS ON THE
APPROPRIATIONS SUBCOMMITTEE.
HE'S VICE CHAIR THE
APPROPRIATIONS SUBCOMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORTATION.
I BELIEVE REPRESENTATIVE ALLEN
IS ON THE THE POLICY
TRANSPORTATION AND
INFRASTRUCTURE COMMITTEE AND I
KNOW THAT SENATOR ERWIN HAS
BEEN ENGAGED AS WELL AND SO I
ACTUALLY JUST SHARED WHAT I
HOPE WILL BE A FRIENDLY
AMENDMENT WITH WITH THE CLERK
AND ASK THAT SHE SHARED AROUND
AND WOULD MOVE THAT WE ADD A
RESOLVE CLAUSE RESOLVED CITY
COUNCIL DIRECTS THE CITY
ADMINISTRATOR TO NOTIFY ANN
ARBOR AREA STATE LEGISLATORS
OF PASSAGE OF THIS RESOLUTION
AND TO ENGAGE WITH THEM AS
APPROPRIATE TO COLLABORATE
TOWARD NEGOTIATING A TRANSFER
OF STATE OWNED TRUNK LINES
SECONDED BY COUNCILOR RACKMAN
THE BODY OF THE BODY.
THANK YOU.
THAT'S ALL I REALLY HAD.
I JUST WANTED TO MAKE SURE THAT
WE WERE USING ALL OF THE TOOLS
POSSIBLE TO TO MOVE THIS
FORWARD.
>> THANKS.
>> FURTHER DISCUSSION.
>> THANK YOU, COUNCILMAN.
IT'S BEEN A WHILE BUT THERE WAS
A TIME WHERE COUNCIL MEMBER
BRIGS HAD DESCRIBED THIS AREA
WITH AN EXAMPLE OF WATCHING A
RESIDENT TRY TO CROSS HERE ON
WITH GROCERIES COMING FROM THE
FOOD PANTRY THAT THAT WE HAVE
AT THE SALVATION ARMY.
>> AND IF YOU TAKE A QUICK LOOK
AT THE MAP ALONG LIKE WHAT
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT THIS THIS
CORRIDOR THAT'S ALSO WHERE LORI
TERRACE'S WHERE WE HAVE OUR LOW
INCOME SENIORS IT'S WHERE THE
DELANA CENTER IS WHERE WE SERVE
OUR HOMELESS POPULATION FOR THE
COUNTY.
IT'S WHERE THE YMCA BUILDING IS
WHERE WE HAVE A NUMBER
OF CLASSES SUMMER CLASSES AND
SERVE CHILDREN IN THE AREA AND
NOT TOO FAR FROM OUR ELEMENTARY
SCHOOLS.
>> SO IF YOU WANT TO VISUALIZE
WHO THIS SERVES, IT'S IT'S
SERVING OUR OUR COMMUNITY
MEMBERS WHO LIVE IN AN AREA
WHERE THEY EXPECT IT TO BE
WALKABLE TO TO A NUMBER
OF SERVICES AND IF WE CAN
IMPROVE THIS EXPERIENCE SO THAT
THEY CAN FEEL SAFE TO
EXPERIENCE THESE SERVICES, MY
HOPE IS THAT THIS IS A WORTHY
INVESTMENT FOR THE DISCUSSION
COUNCIL RATNAM BANKS AND
SPEAKING OF THAT, WE GOT AN
EMAIL TODAY FROM A RESIDENT ON
NORTH MAIN STREET WHO HAS A
FRONT ROW SEAT TO THE DANGERS
OF THAT AREA AND I JUST LIKE TO
SHARE SOME OF WHAT HE SHARED
WITH US.
>> HE'S SEEN FREQUENT UTILITY
POLE COLLISIONS WITH TRUCKS,
DRAMATIC CRASHES INTO SIDEWALKS
,LAWNS WHERE HE WALKS DAILY
WITH HIS FAMILY AND FREQUENT
PEDESTRIAN
COLLISIONS AT
KINGSLY AND BEEKS FREQUENT
THIGHBONES ROLLOVER CRASHES
NEAR THE SUMMIT AND DPO
INTERSECTIONS AND AGAIN HE
EMPHASIZES THE FREQUENCY AND
SEVERITY OF THESE CRASHES WHICH
HE NOTES ARE FUNDAMENTALLY
CAUSED BY DESIGN CHOICES THAT
PRIORITIZE RUSH HOUR TRAFFIC
FLOW OVER ANY OTHER CONCERN.
THERE'S VERY LITTLE TRAFFIC ON
THE STREET DURING MOST OF THE
DAY OUTSIDE OF RUSH HOURS AND
SPECIAL EVENTS.
IT'S AN EXTREMELY WIDE FOUR
LANE DESIGN WITH NO BUFFER FOR
A CURB AND IT LEADS DRIVERS TO
SPEED AND ALSO CREATES DRAMATIC
DANGEROUS CRASHES WHEN THEY
LOSE CONTROL.
YOU KNOW AND HE IN HIS WORDS WE
CAN'T CHANGE THIS REALITY
WITHOUT CHANGING OUR DESIGN
PRIORITIES.
HE'S LOST CONFIDENCE AND I
THINK SO HAVE WE.
AND SO THAT'S THIS IS WHY WE'RE
DOING THIS FOR PEOPLE WHO LIVE
IN EXPERIENCED DAILY GONZALES
BRIGS.
I'M JUST GOING TO ADD ON TO
THOSE PERSONAL ACCOUNT STORIES
BECAUSE I THINK IT'S I THINK
IT'S IMPORTANT TO JUST, YOU
KNOW, STRESS THE LIVABILITY
COMPONENT OF THIS.
>> RIGHT.
I LIVE RIGHT NEXT TO TO HURON
AND YOU KNOW, AS YOU MENTIONED
CONSTANTLY WATCHING FOLKS
TRYING TO MAKE IT ACROSS THE
STREET TO GET FREE FOOD AT THE
SALVATION ARMY.
BUT IT WASN'T TOO LONG AGO THAT
CHILDREN WERE HIT TRYING TO GET
BACK FROM SLOSSON MIDDLE SCHOOL
CROSSING THE ROAD JUST THE
OTHER DAY I WAS BIKING OUT
ALONG WASHTENAW I MEAN NEW
EXCITING ELECTRIC BIKE AND YOU
MADE IT ALL THE WAY OUT THERE
ON OUR LOVELY NETWORK OF ROADS
GET TO GET DOWN WASHTENAW AND
TRY TO DO THE SIMPLE ACT
OF CROSSING THE ROAD AT OUR
LAND ENTRANCE.
>> THERE'S THERE'S NO WAY TO DO
THAT AS A PEDESTRIAN OR CYCLIST
.
SO I HAD TO MAKE AN INCREDIBLY
DANGEROUS DECISION TO TO
VENTURE ACROSS THE STREET AND
I'M HERE BUT WE KNOW FROM THE
CRASH DATA THAT THAT MANY
PEOPLE HAVE NOT BEEN SO LUCKY
ON WASHTENAW FOLKS USED TO BE
SHUTTLED ACROSS THE STREET
MAYBE THEY STILL ARE AT LAURIE
TERRACE TO GET ACROSS TO THE
YMCA TO WORK OUT.
AND SO, YOU KNOW, I THINK THIS
IS A REAL QUALITY OF LIFE
ISSUES FOR COMMUNITY SAFETY.
AND I'M I'M I'M JUST REALLY
EXCITED TO SEE SO MUCH SUPPORT
FOR MOVING THIS FORWARD.
I KNOW THAT COUNCIL MEMBER
HARRISON AND I TALKED ABOUT
DEFINITELY THERE'S THERE'S WORK
THAT IN TERMS OF PRIORITIZING
ON THE POLICY COMMITTEE.
>> YOU KNOW, I WOULD I WOULD
HOPE THAT THAT WE ALSO MOVE
FORWARD AS COUNCIL MEMBER GHAZI
EDWYN SAID, YOU EVERY THE
REALITY IS THAT EVERY CITY IN
THE STATE DESERVES TO HAVE
TRUNK LINES THAT ARE SAFE.
WE DON'T REALLY WANT TO TAKE
CONTROL OF THESE.
WE'RE NOT EVEN TALKING ABOUT
ROAD QUALITY RIGHT HERE.
WE'RE JUST TALKING ABOUT DESIGN
.
>> SO YOU KNOW, I WOULD HOPE
THAT ACTUALLY OTHER SOLUTIONS
MIGHT BE ABLE TO MOVE FORWARD
WHILE WE'RE IN NEGOTIATIONS.
BUT IF NOT WE NEED TO BE
PREPARED TO ACT FOR THE
DISCUSSION.
I'M PARTICULARLY EXCITED ABOUT
THIS THIS PROSPECT THESE
CORRIDORS OF COURSE ARE
FUNDAMENTAL TO, YOU KNOW,
GETTING AROUND TOWN AND OUR
BARRIERS TO GETTING AROUND TOWN
ALL AT THE SAME TIME AND WE AT
THE CITY ARE LOOKING TO MAKE
SURE THAT OUR ROADWAYS ARE SAFE
AND USABLE FOR FOR ALL USERS
AND WE WANT THAT THAT DESIGN
ETHOS THAT TO BE EXTENDED TO
THESE IMPORTANT IMPORTANT
ROADWAYS AS WELL.
I WILL OBSERVE THAT A LOT
OF THIS COMES DOWN TO DOLLARS
AND CENTS BECAUSE THESE ARE
EXPENSIVE ROADWAYS TO TO MAKE
BOTH MAINTAIN OF COURSE, BUT
CERTAINLY TO TO ACCOMPLISH THE
MAJOR CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS,
DESIGN IMPROVEMENTS.
WE'RE LOOKING TO REALIZE IT
WILL BE EASIER FOR SOME
ROADWAYS AND OTHERS RIGHT NOW,
FOR EXAMPLE, THE STATE HAS
PEGGED A REPAIR COST ON MAIN
STREET AND IT WILL BE DIFFICULT
FOR THEM TO LOGICALLY WALK AWAY
FROM THAT DURING THE COURSE
OF NEGOTIATION THEY HAVE NOT
PROVIDED BECAUSE IT'S NOT IN
THEIR WORKPLAN A SIMILAR
CAPITAL PROJECT BUDGET FOR THE
OTHER CORRIDORS.
>> AND SO FOLKS IN THE
COMMUNITY WHO LOOK TO SEE THAT
WE ARE INVESTIGATING A TRANSFER
OF ALL CORRIDORS THAT'S GOING
TO BE THE CONVERSATION.
BUT THAT IN THE EVENT THAT WE
ARE MOVING ANY OF THESE FORWARD
AND I HOPE THAT WE DO IT MIGHT
NOT BE ALL IN ONE FELL SWOOP.
IT MIGHT BE INCREMENTAL AS WE
ARE ABLE TO BALANCE OUR ABILITY
TO FIX WITH THE OBLIGATION TO
PAY FOR THE DISCUSSION ON PAPER
I'LL POST IT IS APPROVED DC
THREE RESOLUTION TO ACCEPT
GRANT FUNDS FROM THE U.S.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
FOR THE TWENTY TWENTY THREE
ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE
GOVERNMENT TO GOVERNMENT GRANT
PROGRAM TO DEVELOP A MODEL
REGIONAL RESILIENCE NETWORK
WITH RESILIENCE WITH RESILIENT
INFRASTRUCTURE IN ANN ARBOR AND
WASHTENAW COUNTY APPROVE A
COOPERATIVE AGREEMENT WITH THE
U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
AGENCY AND APPROPRIATE FUNDS
THE AMOUNT OF ONE MILLION
DOLLARS MOVED BY CANCER A DISH
SECOND BY COUNCIL MEMBER WATSON
DISCUSSION PLEASE OF DC THREE
COUNCIL.
WELL WE DON'T WANT TO LET THIS
GO BY WITHOUT ACKNOWLEDGING
THAT ONCE AGAIN WE HAVE OUR
ENTREPRENEURIAL STAFF SEIZING
FUNDS AND BRINGING THEM INTO
ANN ARBOR TO ACHIEVE OUR TWO
ZERO GOALS.
>> AND SO THIS IS GOING TO BE A
TERRIFIC STEP FORWARD LAUNCHING
A MODEL REGIONAL RESILIENCE
NETWORK.
WHAT IS ENVISIONED IS REALLY I
THINK PRETTY COOL BECAUSE
PARTNERING WITH COMMUNITY BASED
ORGANIZATIONS FOR THREE MORE
RESILIENCE HUBS IN ANN ARBOR
AND THEN A FOURTH IN THE COUNTY
.
SO I LOVE THAT WE ARE THINKING
REGIONALLY ABOUT RESILIENCE AS
WE MUST AND LEADING IN THIS
EFFORT AS WE ARE ABLE TO DO A
SEVEN YEAR THANK YOU.
>> UM IT IS RARE THAT I THINK
SOMEONE CAN MORE THOROUGHLY SUM
SOMETHING UP THAN COUNCIL
MEMBER DISH BUT SINCE I SAW DR.
SALTZ POP UP ON THE SCREEN I
WONDERED IF SHE WANTED TO SAY
ANYTHING ABOUT THIS BECAUSE I
THINK THAT THERE IS PROBABLY
NEVER A BETTER ADVOCATE FOR OUR
RESILIENCY.
>> WE'RE VERY GENEROUS.
WE ARE REALLY EXCITED ABOUT
THIS GRANT OPPORTUNITY WHICH
DOES EVERYTHING THAT COMES JUST
NOTED.
>> IT ALSO DOUBLES DOWN ON OUR
CONTINUED COMMITMENT TO
ACKNOWLEDGING THAT CLIMATE
CHANGE IS HERE AND NOW IS
SOMETHING THAT WE'RE
EXPERIENCING.
WE SAW IT THIS WEEK WITH
INTEREST IN INCREASING
PRECIPITATION PATTERNS FALLING
THROUGHOUT THE REGION.
WE SAW IT THE WEEK BEFORE WITH
HEAT WAVES MOVING THROUGH AND
WE'RE REALLY INTENTIONALLY
TRYING TO DESIGN SYSTEMS
THROUGHOUT OUR ENTIRE COUNTY
THAT HELP MAKE SURE THAT
EVERYONE INCLUDING OUR MOST
VULNERABLE POPULATIONS ARE
CENTERED AND TAKEN CARE OF IN
THIS WORK.
>> SO THERE WILL BE MULTIPLE
THINGS IN THIS GRANT THERE ARE
THE BRICK AND MORTAR RESILIENT
HUBS.
THERE'S THE NETWORK THAT WE'RE
BUILDING TO MAKE SURE WE HAVE
INTERCOUNTY COLLABORATION
AROUND RESILIENCE WORK AND THEN
THERE ARE OTHER THINGS LIKE A
GRANT PROGRAM WHERE WE'RE GOING
TO BE GIVING OUT GRANTS TO
NONPROFITS THAT ARE FOCUSING ON
RESILIENCE AND WE'RE GOING TO
START RESILIENCE.
AMBASSADOR PROGRAM THROUGH THIS
AS WELL.
SO I HOPE TO COME BACK TO YOU
IN THE NOT TOO DISTANT FUTURE
AND SHARE A LITTLE BIT MORE
ABOUT THAT PROGRAM AS IT'S
GETTING ITS LEGS AND WORK WITH
YOU TO RECRUIT MORE COMMUNITY
MEMBERS TO PARTICIPATE IN
DESIGNING THESE HUBS LOOK LIKE
ENGAGING IN THE RESILIENCE
NETWORK.
>> BUT WE'RE WE'RE REALLY
EXCITED TO KIND OF GET A LITTLE
BOOSTER SHOP SHOT IN THE ARM
WITH OUR RESILIENCE.
>> SO THANK YOU FOR THE
OPPORTUNITY FOR FURTHER
DISCUSSION ON SUMMER TAXES WERE
JUST RECENTLY DUE AND I THINK,
YOU KNOW, FOLKS SOMETIMES WILL
REFLECT ON OUR TAXES AND THE
VILLAGES THAT WE'VE PASSED HERE
AND I AM ONCE AGAIN REMINDED
THAT OUR TWENTY TWENTY TWO
COMMITTEE AND COMMUNITY CLIMATE
ACTION VILLAGE IS BEING PUT TO
GOOD USE THROUGH THIS THROUGH
THE WORK IN THIS OFFICE.
IF IF WE THINK ABOUT THE
MILLAGE AS BEING AN INVESTMENT
IN CAPACITY LONG TERM CAPACITY
DO LONG TERM WORK TO EFFECT
LONG TERM CHANGE AND BEING ABLE
TO PARTNER AND QUALIFY FOR
FEDERAL GRANTS AT THIS LEVEL.
THANK YOU.
YOU'RE MOVING THE NEEDLE FASTER
AND WE CAN'T MOVE FAST ENOUGH
FOR THEIR DISCUSSION
OF FAVORITE POSED.
>> IT IS APPROVED.
THANK YOU.
DO YOU HAVE THE CLOTHES THE
PLEASURE OF A CLOSED SESSION
TODAY?
>> NO THANK YOU MAYOR.
WE HAVE BEFORE US THE CLERKS
ARE PART OF COMMUNICATIONS
PETITIONS AND REFERRALS HAVE A
MOTION PLEASE TO APPROVE THE
CLERKS DEPARTMENT BY COUNSEL
PRODUCED BY COUNSEL.
>> MURKOWSKI HAD ONE DISCUSSION
OF THE CLERKS REPORT ON FAVOR
OR OPPOSE THE CLERKS REPORT IS
APPROVED.
>> WE HAVE THE PLEASURE
OF COMMUNICATION TODAY FROM
INDOMITABLE CITY ATTORNEY NOT
TONIGHT.
>> THANK YOU, MR. MAYOR.
IN THE ABSENCE OF PUBLIC
COMMENT OVERFLOW, WE HAVE A
MOTION TO ADJOURN PLEASE MOVE
BY COUNSEL REDUCING THE
CUSTOMER HARRISON DISCUSSION ON
FAVOR POSED.
>> WE'RE ADJOURNED